We say our life is given by the God and everything happens as a his wish. Nothing can happen against his wish.

When we feel uneasy when we suffer we you don't accept that. We want gods interference in our suffering. We want he should take us out from our suffering. We pray for the things which we value. But if we do not get those even after lots of hard work and prayer we not accept that not getting that is god's Desire and it is good for our life. Contrary to that we become angry upon the God, some become atheist. 

As per you, When everything in the life happens as per the gods wish then why don't you accept even your suffering at god's wish. But no we say our Karma decides our happiness in suffering. It's so then what is the use of praying from a system when you have done your work you will get the results automatically. You believe the system is faulty or corrupt or bias and it listens to only those who sing who sing the glory of the system who pray the system. The principle of karmaphala is and infallible truth then you will get the results without any third parties interference. If the principle of everything is driven by the gods Desire is true then your accents are not much meaningful the Onam the only meaning the have is you keep your god happy. If you are got can be happy or sad then how can he become beyond all the gunas. We often say the ultimate Brahmin is nirguni it means he is neither saguni nor durguni or avguni. If you are got can be manipulated by singing his Glory then he is a biased God. 

If you believe everything is done by the God then then all the war fights murders or also as per his wish. Then why you want to interfere into his wish? 

If you believe all the war fight murder and wrong doing in the society it because of human madness then do something through which you become sane your family become sane and your society become sane. No crying before god is going to help. Especially if you are powerful and you are resources and your crying before the God to bring the peace in the society in the family in the world then you are the problem. Ask yourself why do resources are given to you, your health money relationship all are you resources. Use them properly to bring the piece and enjoy rather than praying for the peace enjoy.