---
id: 24    
title: "Corpus: Manmath Nath - Ramayana 4"
layout: single
toc_sticky: true
permalink: /manmathnath-ramayana-4
date: 2024-01-12
tags: [Corpus]
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/banners/corpus-banner.jpg
  # overlay_image: /assets/images/projects/Sarcasm-Detection-System-for-Hinglish-Language.jpg
  # overlay_filter: 0 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
author_profile: false
last_modified_at: 2024-01-12T15:46:43-04:00
toc: false
mathjax: "true"
sidebar:
   nav: "docs"
---

# The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Rāmāyana, Volume 2.

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook. 

Title: The Rāmāyana, Volume 2. Āranya, Kishkindhā, and Sundara Kāndam

Creator: Valmiki

Translator: Manmatha Nath Dutt

Release date: August 31, 2018 [eBook #57826]

Language: English

Produced by James Simmons.

This file was produced from page images at the Internet Archive.

Transcriber’s Note


This book was transcribed from scans of several different copies of the original found at the Internet Archive. The typesetters of the original book represented the letter ā (with a macron above) as â (with circumflex above) when italicized, but this etext uses the macron throughout. Words in italics in this etext were italicized in the original book. I have corrected obvious misspellings but I’ve left variant spellings alone. Some words and names, like _yojana_ and _Garuda_, were spelled two different ways in the same text. I have spelled them consistently to avoid confusion.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RĀMĀYANA, VOLUME 2. KISHKINDHĀ KĀNDAM ***

KISHKINDHĀ KĀNDAM.
   
SECTION I.   SECTION II.   SECTION III.   SECTION IV.   SECTION V.   SECTION VI.   SECTION VII.   SECTION VIII.   SECTION IX.   SECTION X.   SECTION XI.   SECTION XII.   SECTION XIII.   SECTION XIV.   SECTION XV.   SECTION XVI.   SECTION XVII.   SECTION XVIII.   SECTION XIX.   SECTION XX.   SECTION XXI.   SECTION XXII.   SECTION XXIII.   SECTION XXIV.   SECTION XXV.   SECTION XXVI.   SECTION XXVII.   SECTION XXVIII.   SECTION XXIX.   SECTION XXX.   SECTION XXXI.   SECTION XXXII.   SECTION XXXIII.   SECTION XXXIV.   SECTION XXXV.   SECTION XXXVI.   SECTION XXXVII.   SECTION XXXVIII.   SECTION XXXIX.   SECTION XL.   SECTION XLI.   SECTION XLII.   SECTION XLIII.   SECTION XLIV.   SECTION XLV.   SECTION XLVI.   SECTION XLVII.   SECTION XLVIII.   SECTION XLIX.   SECTION L.   SECTION LI.   SECTION LII.   SECTION LIII.   SECTION LIV.   SECTION LV.   SECTION LVI.   SECTION LVII.   SECTION LVIII.   SECTION LIX.   SECTION LX.   SECTION LXI.   SECTION LXII.   SECTION LXIII.   SECTION LXIV.   SECTION LXV.   SECTION LXVI.   SECTION LXVII.  

# KISHKINDHĀ KĀNDAM.




## SECTION I.


Repairing with Lakshmana to the lake Pampā filled with red and white
lotuses and fish Rāma having his senses agitated began to lament. And
beholding there that lake his senses were stirred with delight. Troubled
with passion he spake unto Saumitri saying,—"Behold, O Saumitri, how
beautifully appeareth Pampā of transparent water like unto Baidurja,
graced with full-blown red and white lotuses and various trees. Observe
again, O son of Sumitra, the picturesque wood-land around the lake,
where trees, crowned with large branches resembling the summits of a
mountain, appear like so many hills. Mental agony arising from Sitā’s
ravishment and Bharata’s grief, have been grinding me who am already
stricken with sorrrow. Verily conduceth to my felicity the pleasant lake
Pampā of cool water, scattered with various flowers, covered with
lotuses, highly graceful, girt with variegated woods abounding in
voracious animals and frequented by deer and birds. This green common,
chequered with yellow and blue, appeareth of enhanced beauty by the
various flowers of the trees as if covered with a blanket of diverse
hues. The tops of the trees rich with flowery bunches are gnarled with
creepers of blossoming tips. Now hath appeared, O Saumitri, the fragrant
spring of pleasant breezes, when greatly prevaileth the influence of
Cupid and the trees are graced with fruits and flowers. Behold, O
Saumitri, the beauty of the woods, showering flowers like unto clouds
pouring forth rain. Various trees growing on rocky surfaces, moved by
the wind have been scattering flowers on the earth. Behold, O Saumitri,
the wind is sporting as it were with flowers dropt, dropping and hanging
on the trees. The bees, driven off and singing, pursue the wind, moving
the flowery branches of the trees. While issuing out of the mountainous
hollows the wind is singing as it were and making the trees dance with
the musical notes of the delighted cuckoos. The wind, making the tops of
the trees collide with each other, is as it were stringing them
together. The sandal-cool wind, of pleasant touch, ever removing the
exhaustion of toil, is blowing everywhere carrying with it pure
fragrance. The trees in this nectar-smelling forest are sounding as it
were with the hum of bees. Hillocks overtopped with picturesque and
flowery trees stand beautifully on this mountainous expanse. Trees with
flowery tops, tossed by the airy currents and crested with the bees, are
as if dancing in accompaniment with melodious strains. Behold, the
_Karnikaras_ covered with flowers appear on all sides like unto human
beings decorated with golden ornaments and wearing yellow cloths. This
spring, O Saumitri, sounded by the musical notes of the birds hath been
kindling my grief who am without Sitā. Cupid hath been smiting me the
more who am stricken with grief, and the cuckoos have been defying me,
displaying their mirth, O Lakshmana. At the pleasant fountains the
delighted _Dātyuahas_ with their warblings have been afflicting me who
am possessed by Cupid. Formerly my dear one, while in the asylum,
delighted with the music of these birds, used to attain to a greater joy
addressing me to hear them. Behold, birds of variegated hues, emitting
forth diverse notes have been alighting upon the trees, groves and
creepers from various quarters. O Saumitri, birds and bees of melodious
notes accompanied by their co-mates and delighted with their mutual
companionship are on the banks of this lake. There live happily flocks
of delighted vultures. The trees sounded by the lascivious murmurs of
_Datyuhas_ and _Punskokilas_ have been kindling my amour. The fire of
spring having clusters of Asokas as its embers, the hum of bees as its
sound, the redness of the twigs as its flame, hath been burning me. O
Saumitri, of what avail is this life unto me, not beholding Sitā of
sweet accents, having eyes with their eye-lashes, and a head of curly
hair. O blameless one, this season, when the groves become charming and
the border-lands resound with melodious strains of the cuckoos, is the
most beloved of my dear one. Methinks, this fire of distress,
originating from amorous trouble and enhanced by the influence of
spring, shall soon burn me down. My amorous feelings shall attain to an
intense height, as I do not behold Sitā before, whereas see the
beautiful trees around. Sitā, away from my vision and the spring, drying
up perspiration, have been both inciting my _amour_. That one having the
eyes of a fawn and ruthless vernal breeze, O Saumitri, have been
oppressing me who am overpowered with anxiety and grief. These peacocks
and pea-hens unfurling their wings like unto crystal lattices, have been
dancing hither and thither. These maddened peacocks encircled by the
pea-hens, have been aggravating my amorous desire who am already
possessed by the Cupid. Observe, O Lakshmana, there danceth with her
dancing mate on the mountainous expanse, the pea-hen, troubled with
amorous sentiments. The peacock unfolding his charming wings is moving
after his dear mate mocking me as it were with his cry. Surely the
Rākshasa hath not brought my dear one in this forest of peacocks and
therefore they dance with their mates in this picturesque forest land.
It is unbearable for me to live without Sitā in this season of flowers.
Behold, O Lakshmana, this attachment is to be seen even amongst the
brutes. The pea-hen being influenced by passion is approaching her mate.
Sitā of expansive eyes would have thus neared me being influenced by
_amour_ had she not been carried away. In this season of spring flowers
of this forest are of no avail to me. These pleasant flowers of the
trees have been uselessly falling on the earth with the bees. The birds
exciting my desire have been delightedly warbling in flocks as if
welcoming each other. Surely Sitā, under the influence of another
person, is lamenting in the same strain, as I do, if spring hath
appeared there. Even if spring hath not appeared there how can Sitā
having eyes resembling full-blown lotuses live in my separation? If
spring is there, what can it do her having a beautiful hip and loins,
who hath already been overpowered by a mighty enemy? Surely shall my
dear wife of a slender make, having eyes like lotus-petals and of sweet
accents renounce her life at the appearance of this spring? Methinks,
for certain, the chaste Sitā shall not be able to maintain her being at
my separation. Vaidehi’s attachment is entirely centred in me and mine
in her. This cool breeze of a pleasant touch, carrying the fragrance of
flowers appears like a fire-brand unto me who am thinking of my spouse.
That breeze appeareth painful unto me in Sitā’s absence which, ere this,
had been regarded by me as a source of pleasure in her company. This
bird set up a cry in the sky at that time¹⁰⁷ and now sitting on the tree
is crying delightedly. This bird flying up in the sky brought about
Sitā’s ravishment and this bird shall take me to her having expansive
eyes. Hear, O Lakshmana, the maddening notes of those birds sitting on
the tops of the flowery trees and setting up their melody. The
_Vramaras_ are approaching the _Tilakas_ tossed by the wind like unto
intoxicated damsels. This _Asoka_, enhancing the desires of the amorous,
stands here, as if remonstrating with me by its clusters shaken by the
wind. There appear, O Lakshmana, those blossoming mangoe trees like unto
persons, exercised with passion and smeared with unguents of sandal.
Behold, O Saumitri, O foremost of men, the _kinnaras_ are ranging at
large in this varieagated forestland on the banks of Pampā. Here the
fragrant red lotuses are shedding forth their splendour like unto the
newly risen sun. Here appeareth beautifully the lake Pampā of
transparent water, filled with blue and fragrant lotuses, swans and
_Karandhabas_ and abounding in red lotuses like unto the virgin rays of
the sun and having their filaments crushed by the bees. And the
beautiful woods around the lake have been manifesting their beauty,
filled with _chakrabakas_ and the herds of elephants and deer desirous
of drinking water. Behold, Lakshmana, the picturesque view of the
lotuses oscillated by the ripples driven to and fro by the wind. I do
not delight in my life, not beholding Sitā, having expansive eyes like
unto lotus-petals and ever fond of lotuses. O how wily is the course of
Kāma who hath been presenting unto my mind that auspicious one, hard to
attain and of sweet-accents! Had I not been overpowered by this season
of spring with blossoming trees, I would have been able to put up with
the present amorous infliction. The objects which appeared beautiful
unto me while in the company of Sitā, now seem shorn of all grace in her
separation. My eyes pant for beholding those lotus-petals, O Lakshmana,
because of their resemblance with Sitā’s eyes. Issuing out of the trees
and touching the filaments, the pleasant wind is blowing like unto
Sitā’s breath. Behold O Lakshmana, the flowery branches of the
_Karnikaras_ on the summits of the mountain situated on the southern
bank of Pampā. This prince of mountains, beautified with various metals,
hath been throwing up dusts of diverse colors driven by the wind. O
Saumitri, these mountainous expanses are burning in beauty with
blossoming and beautiful _Kinsukas_ void of leaves. These fragrant
_Malatis_, _Mallikas_, _Karavis_ and lotuses, growing on the banks of
Pampā, and fostered by Pampā’s water, and _Ketakis_, _Sindhubaras_,
_Basantis_, _Matulingas_, _Purnas_, _Kunda_ groves, _Chiribilyas_,
_Madukas_, _Banjulas_, _Vakulas_, _Champakas_, _Tilakas_, _Nāgas_,
_Padmyakas_, blue _Asokas_, _Ankolas_, _Kurantas_, _Churnakas_,
_Paribhadrakas_, and yellow _Lodhras_ on the hills like unto manes of a
lion, are in flowers. There appear beautifully on the hills, blossoming
_Chutas_, _Patalas_, _Kobidaras_, _Muchukundas_, _Arjunas_, _Ketakas_,
_Uddalakas_, _Sirisas_, _Singsapas_, _Dhabas_, _Salmalis_, _Kingsukas_,
_Raktas_, _Kuravas_, _Tinisas_, _Naktamalas_, sandal trees, _Syandanas_,
_Hintalas_, _Tilakas_ and _Nāgas_. Behold, O Saumitri, many a beautiful
and blossoming tree growing on the banks of Pampā and gnarled by
creepers having flowery tips. Like unto inebriate damsels, these
creepers are embracing the trees, hard by, having their branches tossed
by the wind. The breeze, delighted with various tastes is passing from
tree to tree, mountain to mountain and forest to forest. Some fragrant
trees, covered with flowers and some with buds, appear beautifully
green. Saying, ’this is sweet’, ’this is pleasant’ and ’this is
full-blown,’ the attached bees are falling to the trees. And rising
again they are approaching the other trees growing on the banks of
Pampā. This forestland, strewn with flowers dropping spontaneously from
the trees like unto a bed sheet, hath become pleasant. O Saumitri, the
mountainous levels variegated with flowers, are appearing like unto
beds. Behold O Saumitri, the origination of flowers in the trees at the
expiry of the winter. The trees as if vieing with each other, have
blossomed in this season of flowers. The trees, O Lakshmana, with bees
humming around and with flowery branches are as if welcoming each other.
This swan, hath been sporting with its mate in the lucid water of Pampā
exciting my amour. Truly does this lake like unto Mandākini itself,
deserve the accomplishments that are known all over the world. O best of
Raghus, I do not desire Ayodhya or the dignity of Indra if that chaste
Sitā, be found here and if I can live with her. I shall renounce all
desires and thoughts if I can sport with her in this picturesque and
green forest-land. These trees, clothed in diverse flowery attires, have
been exciting my thought in this forest, who have been deprived of my
dear one. O Saumitri, behold this Pampā of cool water, enveloped on all
sides with lotuses, and frequented by _Chakrabakas_, _Karandavas_,
_Chraunchas_, _Plabas_ and high deer. Its beauty hath been further
enhanced by the birds caroling. Diverse delighted birds have been
exciting my passion, reminding me of my dear spouse, of blameless
countenance, having a moonlike face and eyes resembling lotus-petals.
Behold on the yonder mountainous expanse of various colors, stags
sporting with hinds and myself on the other hand forsaken by Vaidehi
having eyes resembling those of an antelope. These deer ranging hither
and thither have been distressing my soul. It is then only that I shall
attain to mental quietitude if I can behold Sitā on this charming
mountainous expanse filled with birds and deer. It is then that I shall
draw my vital breath, O Saumitri, if Vaidehi, of slender waist, with me,
enjoyeth the fine breeze of Pampā dispersing the fragrance of lotuses
and _Saugandhikas_ and ever assuaging grief. Blessed are they, O
Lakshraana who enjoy this wild breeze of Pampā. How hath that
exquisitely fine daughter of Janaka, my beloved spouse, having eyes
resembling lotus-petals, brought under the control of another person,
been living forsaken by me? What shall I speak unto that virtuous,
truthful king Janaka when he shall interrogate me about Sitā’s welfare
in an assembly? Where is that Sitā now who followed me in the track of
virtue, who am unfortunate and have been exiled unto woods by my Sire?
How shall I keep up (my being) being poorly, O Lakshmana, being forsaken
by that Sitā who followed me, deprived of kingdom and sense? My heart is
sinking not beholding her fine spotless countenance, having eyes
resembling lotuses and smelling sweet. When shall I hear again O
Lakshmana, the sweet incomparable and auspicious accents of Vaidehi,
intervened by smiles and couched in an elegant and easy style? That
chaste and exquisitely fine damsel even when afflicted in the woods used
to welcome me under the influence of Cupid as if she were delighted and
had her sorrows removed. O son of a king, what shall I speak unto
Kauçalya in Ayodhya when she will ask mc of her high-souled
daughter-in-law’s welfare and whereabouts? Do thou proceed, O Lakshmana,
and join Bharata gifted with fraternal affection. I am incapable of
living any more without that daughter of Janaka." Thereupon Lakshmana
addressed unto the high-souled Rāma who was thus bewailing like one
helpless with the following pregnant and immutable words. "Forsake thy
grief, O Rāma. May good betide thee. Do not grieve O best of men. Even
the sinless persons lose their seuse when they are afflicted with grief.
Remembering the grief consequent on separation do thou forsake thy
attachment unto thy dear one. Out of an excess of oil even the wick
burneth itself. O worshipful one, even if he hideth himself in the
region under the earth or in a darker quarter, Rāvana shall not be able
to draw his breath. Do thou procure information about that
vicious-souled Rākshasa; either he shall give up Sitā or meet with
destruction. Unless he gives back Sitā, forsooth I shall kill him even
if he enters with her into Diti’s womb. Do thou, console thyself and
renounce thy poorliness of mind, O worshipful one. Without sufficient
endeavours even men of energy do not regain their lost ends. O
worshipful one mighty is the course of energy. And than this there is no
greater power on earth. And there is nothing unattainable in this world
to one gifted with energy. Persons endowed with zeal do never wear away
in their actions. And resorting to this energy only that we shall regain
Jānaki. Do thou not percieve that thou art high-souled and highly
educated? And leaving behind grief do thou forsake thy amorous madness."
Being thus accosted by Lakshmana, Rāma having his mind stricken with
sorrow, attained to mental quietitude renouncing grief and dolour.
Thereupon Rāma, of unimaginable prowess, passed slowly by the pleasant
and charming Pampā with banks girt with trees shaken by the wind.

Thereupon the high-souled Rāma, stricken with grief passed along
beholding the forest-land, fountains, caves and revolving aside (the
pregnant words of Lakshmana). And the high-souled Lakshmana, of
unagitated mind, intent upon Rāma’s welfare and wending like unto an
infuriated elephant, cheered him up by means of moral and heroic
counsels. Beholding their countenances passing strange, that mighty
chief, of monkeys, while ranging near the mount Rishyamuka, became
highly terrified and motionless. Observing them range there, that
high-souled monkey, wending slowly like unto an elephant and stricken
with fear and grief, became exceedingly sorry. Espying the highly
powerful Rāma and Lakshmana there, monkeys, terrified, entered into that
holy and pleasant asylum, a worthy refuge and having its inside always
frequented by them.

  ¹⁰⁷ This refers to the time when Rāma was united with Sitā _i. e._ at
      the time of his wedding, At that time the bird, flying up in the
      sky set up an inauspicious cry indicating that in no distant time
      he should be separated from her; and now his sitting on the tree
      and cawing delightedly indicated that he should soon be re-united
      with her.—T.




## SECTION II.


Beholding those two high-souled brothers Rāma and Lakshmana, heroic and
with great scimitars in their hands, Sugriva became terrified. That best
of monkeys, of a disturbed mind, cast his looks around and could not
stand (patiently) at any place. Beholding those two of great prowess he
could not make up his mind to remain there and the heart of that
terrified monkey, sank. Pondering over what is more and what is less
important the virtuous-souled Sugriva became highly anxious along with
that monkey-herd. Beholding Rāma and Lakshmana, Sugriva, the king of
monkeys, greatly exercised with anxiety spake unto his counsellors,
saying—"Forsooth, these two heroes, in false guises and wearing bark,
despatched by Vāli, have come here traversing the forest stronghold."
Beholding these two mighty archers the counsellors of Sugriva, quitting
that mountainous expanse proceeded to another best of hills. Thereupon
proceeding quickly the commanders of various monkey herds stood
encircling the king of monkeys and the chief of leaders. The monkeys
thus sharing in the misery and happiness (of their chief) proceeded
jumping from hill to hill shaking the summits thereof, with the velocity
(of their persons). Thereupon those mighty monkeys, jumping, broke down
the flowery trees of that stronghold. Those best of monkeys, springing
all around that mighty hill, proceeded terrifying the deer, the wild
cats and the tigers. Stationed on that best of mountains the ministers
of Sugriva, coming in the front of that monkey-chief, stood with clapped
palms. Thereupon Hanumān, skilled in speech, spake unto Sugriva,
terrified and afraid of Vāli’s wicked wiles, saying:—"Let all the
monkeys renounce Vāli’s fear; in this best of mountains, Malaya—there is
no fear of him. I do not behold, O best of monkeys, that wicked Vāli of
terrible looks, afraid of whom thou hast fled away and for whom thou art
anxious. I do not observe here, O gentle one, the wicked-souled Vāli,
thy elder brother of impious actions and whom thou dost fear and I do
not percieve any terror proceeding from him. O monkey-chief, truly
manifest is thy monkey-hood and it is through thy light-heartedness that
thou art incapable of fixing thy soul. Gifted with intellect and
knowledge do thou perform all by means of gestures. A king void of sense
cannot govern all creatures." Hearing those pregnant words of
Hanumān,Sugriva said in better accents—"Who is not terified beholding
those two mighty armed heroes, having expansive eyes, with bows, arrow,
and daggers in their hands like unto two sons of a celestial? Methinks
these two best of men have been despatched by Vāli. Kings have many
friends. And it is not proper for me to place confidence in them. People
should know that enemies, always treacherous by nature, range under
false guises. And those foes, availing of their credulity, bring about
their destruction whenever opportunity presents itself. Vāli is
eminently expert in despatching business. Monarchs, cognizant of many a
wily expedient, bring about others’ destruction. It is proper to discern
them by means of disguised spies. O monkey, do thou proceed under a
false guise and come by their intentions, examining them aright by their
countenances, gestures and words. Do thou ascertain their intention. If
dost thou find them delighted, secure their confidence in my favour, by
eulogizing me again and again and giving out unto them my views. O best
of monkeys,do thou ask them why they have entered this forest, if thou
dost perceive that these two archers are pure-souled. Do thou determine
the fairness and unfairness of their purpose by means of their gestures
and conversation." Being commanded by that chief of monkeys, the son of
Maruta purposed to approach Rāma and Lakshmana. Assenting to the words
of the terrified and unconquerable Sugriva and saying ’Be it so,’
Hanumān, the high-souled monkey proceeded where the heroic Rāma was with
Lakshmana.




## SECTION III.


Understanding the words of the high-souled Sugriva, Hanumān, proceeded,
springing, from the mount Rishyamuka, towards the descendants of Raghu.
Thereupon renouncing his monkey shape, the son of Maruta, not confidihg
in them, assumed the semblance of a mendicant. Approaching them humbly,
Hanumān paid obeisance unto them. And he eulogized them truly in words,
sweet and pleasant. Greeting duly those two heroes, having truth for
their prowess, that best of monkeys addressed them in sweet accents in
consonance with Sugriva’s instructions. "Ye are ascetics of celebrated
austerities, resembling the Rajarshis and celestials and best of
Brahmacharis, why have ye come here causing fear unto these deer and
other wild animals of the forest? Surveying around the trees grown on
the banks of Pampā, ye have enhanced the beauty of this lake of
auspicious water. Who are ye two youthful figures of mighty arms,
wearing bark, patient, sighing and troubling these wild animals? Heroic,
of leonine looks, gifted with mighty strength and prowess, slayers of
foes, and holding a bow like unto that of Sakra; graceful, of a pleasant
countenance, of prowess like unto a mighty bull, having hands resembling
the trunks of elephants, effulgent, great among men, youthful,
beautifying this chief of mountains with the effulgence of your persons,
worthy of having kingdoms, and like unto celestials, why have ye come
here? Having eyes resembling lotus-petals, heroic, wearing matted locks,
resembling each other, have ye come here from the celestial region?
Verily the Sun and the Moon have come down to the earth of their own
accord. Of spacious breast, heroic, having leonine shoulders, gifted
with high energy, stout like unto plump bulls and human albeit looking
like celestials, why are not your long, round arms, resembling
_Paridhas_ and deserving all ornaments adorned? Methinks ye two are
perfectly able to protect this entire earth, filled with forests and
oceans, and intersected by the mountains Vindhya and Meru. These thy
painted and smooth bows appear like unto the thunder-bolts of Indra
adorned with gold. And these beautiful quivers are filled to the brim
with sharpened and deadly shafts like unto flaming fire and serpents.
And these two daggers, of mighty proportions, furnished with burning
gold, appear like unto serpents, let loose. Why do ye not answer me
accosting you thus? A certain heroic and virtuous monkey-chief, by name
Sugriva, hath been journeying on this earth, distressed at heart, being
driven away by his brother. I have come here being despatched by that
high-souled Sugriva—my name is Hanumān, the foremost of monkeys. That
virtuous-souled Sugriva desires to make friends with you. And know me to
be his counsellor—a monkey, the son of _Pavana_, ranging every where at
my will, coming here, under the guise of a mendicant, from the mount
Rishymuka, for the welfare of Sugriva." Having addressed thus those two
heroes—Rāma and Lakshmana, Hanumān, conversant with words and skilled in
speech, did not speak again. Hearing those words, the effulgent Rāma,
with a delighted countenance, spake unto his younger brother,
Lakshmana—sitting by him. "He is the counsellor of the high-souled
Sugriva, the lord of monkeys and hath approached me, soliciting my
friendship in his (Sugriva’s) favour. Do thou welcome, with pleasant
words, O Saumitri, this monkey—Sugriva’s minister, the subduer of foes,
affectionate and skilled in speech. None can speak thus who hath not
mastered the _Rig-veda_, borne well the _Yajur-veda_ and acquainted
himself thoroughly with the _Shyam-veda_. Forsooth he hath studied well
all the Grammars, for he hath not used a single inelegant word though he
hath addressed me with a number of them. And no defect was perceived on
his countenance, eyes, forehead, brows or on any of his limbs. His
words,—few, beyond all suspicion, pleasant, and uttered in a mild
tone,—came out readily of his throat and breast. He has uttered accents,
wonderful, ready, accomplished, auspicious and captivating. Whose heart
is not moved by these wonderful words, proceeding from heart, throat and
brain)? Even an enemy, who hath his sword uplifted, (is moved). O
sinless one, how doth that monarch accomplish his objects who hath not
got such a messenger? Indeed whose emissaries are so accomplished, all
his missions are fulfilled only by virtue of their words." Thus
addressed, Saumitri, skilled in speech, welcomed that monkey—Sugriva’s
counsellor and son of Pavana. ’O learned one! We knew well the
accomplishments of the high-souled Sugriva. We shall find out that king
of monkey herds. O Hanumān, O best of monkeys, we shall go by whatever
thou shalt say, under the instructions of Sugriva." Hearing these
skillful words, that son of Pavana, delighted, revolving within him the
means for Sugriva’s conquest, purposed to bring about a friendly union
between them.




## SECTION IV.


Hearing those words (of Rāma) and learning his amicable feeling (in
relation to Sugriva} as also, seeing that Rāma was willing to assist
Sugriva. Hanumān, getting exceedingly delighted, remembered Sugriva.
"Since this one of successful acts hath been come by and also this
business is in hand, the high-souled Sugriva will most probably obtain
the monarchy." Then transported with joy, that foremost of monkeys,
Hanumān, in these words, replied unto Rāma, deft in speech, saying, "Why
is it, that accompanied with thy younger brother, hast thou come to this
dense and trackless forest, garnished with the wood-lands of Pampā, and
rilled with various kinds of ferocious beasts?" Hearing those words of
his, Lakshmana, directed by Rāma, informed (Hanunān) of all about Rāma,
the son of Daçaratha. "There was a king named Daçaratha. Possessed of
effulgence, and attached unto righteousness, he, in consonance with his
proper duties, for aye, governed the four orders. He hath no hater; nor
doth he hate any one. And in relation to all creatures he was like
another great-father. And he celebrated _Agnishtoma_ and other
sacrifices with presents (to Brāhmanas). This one is his eldest son,
named Rāma, famous among men. He is the refuge of all creatures, and
competent to carry out the injunctions of his father. The eldest son of
Daçaratha, he is foremost of all his sons in merit. He bears marks of
royalty, and hath the prosperity of a kingdom. Deprived of his kingdom,
in company with myself, he hath come hither with the view of dwelling in
this wood. And, O highly exalted one, this one of subdued senses is
followed by his wife Sitā even as at the decline of day the exceedingly
effulgent Sun is followed by (his spouse) Splendour. I am the younger
brother of this one endeued with gratitude and of various lore. Subdued
by his virtues, I, Lakshmana by name, have dedicated myself to his
service. Worthy of happiness, homage, and intent upon the welfare of all
beings, deprived of wealth and living in the forest, he hath his wife
carried off by a Rākshasa, wearing shapes at will. Nor have we yet (been
able) to ascertain who is that Rākshasa that hath carried off his wife.
A son of Diti named Danu, had, by virtue of an imprecation, undergone
Rākshasa-hood. He it is who had related unto us all about the capable
Sugriva.— "That exceedingly puissant one shall have a knowledge of the
ravisher of thy wife." Having said this, Danu beaming (with a halo) went
to heaven. Thus have I related unto thee all as it fell out. Both Rāma
and myself have saught the shelter of Sugriva. Having given away profuse
wealth and attained high fame, this one who formerly was the lord of the
worlds, now wishes to make Sugriva his master. That one attached unto
virtue, that refuge (of all)—the son of that shelter (of all beings)
hath come under the protection of Sugriva. That spiritual guide, who ere
now was worthy of being the shelter (of all) and who (actually) was the
refuge (of all creatures)—Rāghava, hath saught the shelter of Sugriva.
That Rāma in whose happiness and favor the subjects found their
felicity, seeketh the good graces of Sugriva. Famed over the three
worlds, the eldest son of that monarch who had always and for aye
honored all the kings of the earth crowned with every virtue,—viz. Rāma,
hath sought the protection of Sugriva, lord of monkeys. On Rāma being
overwhelmed with sorrow, tried by grief, and having come under his
refuge, it behoveth Sugriva along with the leaders of bands to show
favor unto Rāma." When Sumatra’s son shedding tears had spoken thus,
that one skilled in speech, Hanumān, answered in these words, ’Persons
of such a stamp, endeued with understanding, of controlled anger and
subdued senses, should be seen by the master of monkeys; and such come
within one’s ken through blessed luck. He also hath been driven out of
his kingdom, and hath incurred the hostility of Vāli. And his wife torn
away from him, he dwelleth in this wood, in fear, having been
exceedingly harassed by his brother. That son of the Sun, Sugriva, along
with us, will help thee in seeking out Sitā. Having said these sweet and
hurried words, Hanumān said unto Rāghava, ’I will (now) repair unto
Sugriva.’ When Hanumān had said this, the righteous Lakshmana duly
paying homage unto the former, addressed Rāghava, saying, ’From the glad
way in which this son of the god of the wind is speaking, it appears
that he also seeks thy service; and, arriving (at this region) thou
also, Rāghava, hast reaped success. He speaketh openly with a delightful
light in his countenance; and cheerfulness. (It seems) that the heroic
Hanumān, son unto the God of wind doth not speak anything that is
false.’ Then that vastly wise one Hanumān the son of the wind god
departed, taking with him the heroic descendants of Raghu, for
(presenting them) unto the monarch of monkeys. Renouncing the guise of a
beggar, and assuming the form of a monkey, that foremost of monkeys went
away, placing those heroes on his back. And then the heroic monkey, the
son of the wind-god, of wide fame, and great prowess, with his mind
perfectly pure, considering himself as crowned with success, and
experiencing exceeding delight, arrived at that best of mountains in
company with Rāma and Lakshmana.




## SECTION V.


Having departed from Rishyamuka, and arrived at the Malaya hill, Hanumān
informed the king of monkeys of (the arrival of) the descendants of
Raghu. "O exceedingly wise one, this one that hath come here is Rāma
having truth for his prowess. This is Rāma having truth for his prowess,
in company with his brother, Lakshmana. Rāma the son of Daçaratha, is
born in the race of the Ikshwākus. Ever doing the will of his sire, he
has been sent hither, in order that his father’s verity may stand in
tact. Rāma, who hath come to the forest, is the son of him who hath
propitiated Fire with _Rājasuyas_ and horse sacrifices,—dispensing
Dakshinas and kine by hundreds and thousands—and who hath governed the
earth by asceticism and truthful speech. His son Rāma hath come to the
forest through a woman. While that high-souled one having his senses
under control was dwelling in the woods, his wife was carried off by
Rāvana; and he (Rāma) hath (in consequence) sought thy protection. Do
thou, granting an interview unto the brothers Rāma and Lakshmana—both of
them worthy of homage— who are eager for thy friendship, receive them
respectfully." Hearing Hanumān’s words, Sugriva—lord of monkeys,
becoming visible (at his will), gladly spake unto Rāghava, "Sir, you are
versed in morality, and bear love towards all. The son of the wind-god
hath faithfully described your virtues unto me. That you, O lord, are
anxious to contract friendship with me who am a monkey does me honor and
is my gain. If you relish friendship with me, do you take this stretched
arm and my hand with yours,—and bind yourself fast with a vow." Hearing
these sweet words of Sugriva, (Rāma) exceedingly delighted, pressed
Sugriva’s hand with his. And contracting friendship with Sugriva, Rāma
experiencing great joy embraced him warmly. Then that subduer of foes,
Hanumān, leaving off the guise of a beggar, in his native shape produced
a fire with two pieces of wood. Then worshipping that flaming fire with
flowers, he, well pleased, carefully placed it between them (Rāma and
Sugriva.) Then Sugriva and Rāghava went round the fire; and (thus) they
were fastened in friendship. And with delighted hearts, both of them—the
monkey and Rāghava began to gaze at each other, yet they did not feel
satiated. "Thou art the friend of my heart. Our happiness and misery are
common,"—Sugriva, rejoicing greatly, said these words unto Rāghava. Then
spreading a beautifully blossoming spray of Sāla, full of foliage,
Sugriva made an awning and sat down with Rāghava. Hanumān, the son of
the wind-god with great joy gave unto Lakshmana a bough of a sandal
tree, plentifully blossoming. Next Sugriva, feeling high rapture, with
his eyes expanded with joy, answered Rāma blandly in sweet words,
saying, "Oppressed have I been, O Rāma; and here am always afflicted
with fear. Deprived of my wife, I have, agitated with apprehension,
sought refuge in this dense wilderness. I am afflicted with fright, and
worried by fear, with my senses bewildered in this wood. Wronged have I
been by Vāli, my brother; and I have incurred his hostility, O Rāghava.
And, O exalted one, do thou dispell the fear of me, who am tormented
with fear on account of Vāli. And, O Kākutstha, it behoves thee so to
act that I may not become subject to fear." Thus addressed, the powerful
Kākutstha, knowing righteousness, and devoted to virtue, answered
Sugriva, smiling, "O mighty monkey, that the outcome of amity is good
offices I am well aware of. I will slay that captor of thy wife Vāli.
These infallible sharpened shafts of mine, resembling the sun, feathered
with the plumes of the Kanka, like unto the thunderbolt of the great
Indra, having sharp heads and even knots, like infuriated
serpents,—being let go with vehemence, shall alight upon the impious
Vāli. Do thou today behold Vāli slain with sharpened shafts, resembling
venomous snakes,—like unto a torn hill lying on the ground." Hearing
those words of Rāghava fraught with his welfare, Sugriva supremely
rejoiced, said these words, informed with rapture, "Thou hero! Thou lion
among men! by thy grace shall I obtain both my beloved and my monarchy.
O God among men, do thou so deal with that foe, my elder brother, that
he may not again wrong me." The left eyes of Sitā, the lord of apes, and
night rangers,—respectively like the lotus, gold, and flaming fire,
throbbed when the friendship between Rāma and Sugriva was contracted.




## SECTION VI.


Sugriva well pleased again addressed Rāghava, the son of Raghu, saying,
"O Rāma, this servant of thine, foremost of my counsellors, Hanumān,
hath related (unto me), the reason of thy arrival in this lone forest.
Thy wife, Maithili, daughter unto Janaka, separated from thee as well as
the intelligent Lakshmana, and weeping (in consequence) was carried off
by a Rāksha. Seeing for opportunities of doing mischief that Rāksha,
having slain Jatāyu, hath caused unto thee the grief that comes of
separation from one’s wife. But thou wilt soon be relieved from the
sorrow that comes of separation from one’s wife. Her will I bring like
unto the ravished Devaçruti. O repressor of foes, whether she be in the
nether regions or under the sky, I will, bringing thy wife, make her
over unto thee. O Rāghava, know my words to be true. O mighty-armed one,
like unto poison, thy wife is incapable of being digested even by the
gods and Asuras with Indra (at their head). O mighty-armed one, leave
off sorrow, I will bring back thy beloved. From guess I find that it was
doubtless Mithilā’s daughter whom I saw when she was being carried away
by that Rāksha of terrific deeds. She was crying, ’Rāma, Rāma,
Lakshmana, Lakshmana,’ and in the lap of Rāvana she looked like the wife
of the Snake-chief. Seeing me along with my four counsellors stationed
at the hill, she dropped down her scarf and her ornaments. All these, O
Rāghava, I have taken and kept (with me). I will bring them. It behoveth
thee to recognise them." Thereupon Rāma spoke unto the sweet-speeched
Sugriva, ’Bring (them), at once, my friend. Why dost thou tarry?’ Having
been thus addressed, Sugriva swiftly entered a deep cavern in the
mountain, with the view of doing what was dear unto Rāghava. Then taking
the scarf as well as the ornaments. "Look at this," (Saying this) the
monkey held them before Rāma. And taking the sheet and the ornaments,
(Rāma) had his eyes filled with tears, like the moon covered by the dew.
And from affection for Sitā, (Rāma,) his eyes filled with tears,
deprived of patience, fell down to the ground. And placing the elegant
ornaments on his bosom, he sighed again and again, like an enraged
serpent in a hole. And seeing Sumitra’s son at his side, Rāma shedding
ceaseless tears, began to lament piteously, "O Lakshmana, behold this
scarf and these ornaments which Vaidehi, while being carried away, let
fall from her person to the earth. Surely Sitā, while being ravished,
let these fall on a sward, for these remain as before." Thus accosted,
Lakshmana spoke, saying, "I do not know her bracelets; I do not know her
ear-rings. But I know full well her bangles on account of my always
bowing down unto her feet." Thereupon Rāghava said these words unto
Sugriva, "Tell me, O Sugriva, at what place didst thou see Sitā, while
she, dear unto me as life, was taken away by the fierce-looking
Rākshasa? And where doth that Rāksha, who hath brought on this high
peril, and for whom I will slay all the Rākshasas, live? He, that hath
carried off Mithilā’s daughter, and roused my wrath, hath certainly for
his own end, opened the door of death. Tell me all about that ranger of
the night, that deceitfully hath carried away my dearest wife from the
forest. My foe, O lord of monkey, will I to-day send to the
neighbourhood of Yama."




## SECTION VII.


Thus addressed by the aggrieved Rāma, the monkey, Sugriva, his accents
obstructed by vapour and his eyes filled with tears, said with joined
hands, "I do not know the hidden abode of that exceedingly wicked
Rākshasa,—nor do I know his heroism and prowess, or the lineage of that
one sprung from a vicious race. O vanquisher of foes, leave off
sorrowing. I promise unto thee truly, I will exert so that thou mayst
obtain Maithili. Slaying Rāvana with his hosts, and putting forth my
manliness capable of pleasing others, I will speedily act so that thou
mayst be pleased. Do not be overwhelmed with grief: summon the fortitude
that is in thee. Such lightness of sense doth not become persons like
thee. I also have experienced mighty disaster arising out of separation
from my wife; but I do not weep in this wise,— nor do I forsake my
fortitude. A despicable monkey as I am, I do not grieve for her,—and
what again shall I say of one that is magnanimous, endued with meekness
and firmness, and great? It behoveth thee to restrain thy falling tears
by patience. It behoveth thee not to resign that patience which is the
dignity of persons possessed of the quality of goodness. Persons endued
with firmness of understanding by help of their intellect, do not in
calamity consequent on separation from dear ones, or on the occasion of
loss of wealth, or of fear arising from thieves, wild beasts, &c, or of
loss of life itself, lose their self-possession. He that is senseless as
well as he that suffers himself to be overwhelmed with grief, losing all
control over self, drown themselves in sorrow like a boat bearing a
heavy load in water. I soothe thee from the love I bear towards thee. Do
thou have recourse to manliness. It doth not behove thee to let grief
overcome thee. Those that indulge in sorrow, know no happiness; and
their virtue¹⁰⁸ goeth out of them. Therefore it behoveth thee not to
grieve. The life even of him that is mastered by sorrow is in jeopardy.
Therefore, thou foremost of monarchs, leave off that grief. Do thou
entirely have recourse to fortitude. In the spirit of a friend I tell
what is for thy good: I do not instruct thee. Honor the amity I bear
towards thee. It behoveth thee not to weep." Thus sweetly consoled by
Sugriva, Rāghava with the end of his cloth wiped his face tarnished with
tears. And after that lord, Kākutstha, had recovered his natural state
through the words of Sugriva, he embraced Sugriva and addressed him,
saying, "O Sugriva, that which, pleasing and profitable, proper and fit,
ought to be done by a friend, hath been done by thee. Solicited by thee,
I have, O friend, regained my natural tone of mind. Such a friend is
rare, specially at such a time. But thou shouldst strive to trace
Maithili as well as bring about the destruction of that fierce Rākshasa,
the impious Rāvana. Do thou also without reserve say what I shall have
to do for thee. Like corn sown in a fertile field in the rainy season,
every concern of thine shall attain success. O best of monkeys, do thou
verily consider as true the words that I have uttered through affection.
Falsehoods have I never spoken before, nor will I ever say one (in
future). This I promise to thee. I swear by truth itself." Hearing
Rlghava’s words, and in special his promise, Sugriva felt exceedingly
delighted along with this monkey ministers. Thus fast bound in
friendship, the man and the monkey conversed with each other about
(topics) which each thought fit, connected with their joys and griefs.
Hearing the words of that illustrious monarch of kings, that
hero—greatest of monkeys—considered and felt in his heart as if his work
had already been accomplished.

  ¹⁰⁸ In the sense of energy.—T.




## SECTION VIII.


Sugriva, rejoiced at the words of Rāma, said "unto that hero, the elder
brother of Lakshmana, who was well pleased. "I am, without doubt, worthy
of being favored by the gods, since thou accomplished and furnished with
virtues art my friend. By thy help, O Rāma, one can, O sinless one,
obtain the kingdom of the celestials,—what is to be said of one’s
kingdom, O lord? I, who have, in the presence of Fire, gained for my
friend (thee) sprung from the Rāghava race, am, O Rāghava worthy of
being honored by my friends and relations. Thou also shalt by and by
learn that I am a fit friend for thee; but I can not speak unto thee of
the qualities that abide in me. O free one, the felicity of high-souled
and self-governed friends like thee abounds and is enduring. Pious
friends look upon the silver, and gold, and the elegant ornaments of
pious friends as common property. Whether rich or poor, happy or
miserable, good or bad, a friend is the greatest refuge (of his friend).
Witnessing such affection, people can, O sinless one, forsake wealthy
comfort, and even their native land for the sake of their friends."
Thereat the graceful Rāma, in front of the intelligent Lakshmana
resembling Vasava, said unto Sugriva of a pleasing presence, —"It is
even so." The next day seeing Rāma as well as the mighty Lakshmana
seated on the ground, Sugriva briskly cast his eyes about the forest.
And hard by that lord of monkeys discovered a _Sāla_ tree, bearing a few
beautiful blossoms, with its wealth of foliage, decked by blade bees.
Thereat tearing off a beautiful bough full of leaves, Sugriva spread it
(on the earth), and then sat down with Rlghava. And seeing them seated,
Hanumān breaking off a branch of _Sāla_, humbly made Lakshmana sit down.
Seeing Rāma seated at his ease in that best of mountains abounding in
_Sāla_ flowers, and cheerful like the ocean, Sugriva from love spoke
unto Rāma sweet and excellent words, of which the letters vibrated with
delight. "Wronged by my brother, I deprived of my wife and exceedingly
distressed, and exercised with fear, live in this foremost of mountains,
Rishyamuka. And, O Rāghava, my senses wildered, having been oppressed by
Vāli, and having incurred his enmity, I am afflicted with fear, and
tormented with fright. O thou, that removest the fear of all creatures,
it behoveth thee who am tormented by fear and am helpless, to extend thy
favor unto me." Thus accosted, that ever energetic one knowing
righteousness and devoted to it, Kākutstha, smiling, said unto Sugriva,
"Benefits make friends, while injuries denote enemies. Even this very
day will I slay him that hath deprived thee of thy wife. O exalted one,
these feathered shafts of exceeding energy, sprung from the Kārtikeya
forest, decked with gold, furnished with the plumes of the Kanka,
resembling the thunderbolt of the great Indra, having smooth knots, and
sharp heads, are like enraged serpents. Thou shalt behold thy brother
and enemy, who is named Vāli slain by my shafts, and lying like a
dislodged hill." Hearing Rāghava’s words, Sugriva—lord of hosts—felt
excess of joy and exclaimed, "Excellent well! Excellent well!" "O Rāma,
overwhelmed am I by grief. Thou art the succour of those afflicted with
sorrow. Having made thee my friend, I express to thee my grief. I have,
in the presence of Fire by giving thee my hand, made thee my friend.
Thou art dearer unto me than life itself. This I swear unto thee by
Truth. Having made thee my friend, I inspired with confidence am
unbosoming myself to thee. The sorrow, that is in my heart, is
constantly enfeebling my mind." Having proceeded thus far, he, his eyes
filled with tears and his words faltering because of vapour, could not
speak aloud. And Sugriva suddenly restrained, before Rāma, the force of
tears, like unto the tide of a river. And having restrained his tears
and wiped his fair eyes, that energetic one, sighing heavily, again went
on,—"Formerly, O Rāma, I was deprived of my kingdom and reproached in
harsh language by the strong Vāli. And he also took away my wife dearer
unto me than life; and my friends have been imprisoned and been bound.
That wicked wight, O Rāghava, seeks my life. Many monkeys commissioned
by him have been slain by me. It was, O Rāghava, in consequence of this
fear that when I (first) saw thee, I did not come out. This is all the
fear that oppresses me. My adherents are only these headed by Hanumān.
It is for this that although reduced to the greatest straits I have been
able to preserve my life. These affectionate apes protect me on all
sides. They go when I go, and stay when I stay. Why should I expatiate?
In brief, Vāli my elder brother, famed for his prowess, is my foe. Even
by his death my present pain would be removed. Both my life and my
happiness are bound up with his death. I have, O Rāma, communicated unto
thee, the way in which my grief might be removed. Whether in joy or in
sorrow, a friend is the refuge of his friend." Hearing these words, Rāma
said unto Sugriva, "What for arose hostility between thyself and Vāli? I
wish to hear this (related) faithfully. Having learnt the cause of your
hostility, and ascertained your strength and weakness, I will, O monkey,
understanding the irritation that hath ensued, compass thy happiness.
Great is my wrath, on hearing thee disgraced; and like a downpour in the
rainy season my ire increases, shaking my very heart. Do thou cheerfully
and confidingly speak while I fix the string to my bow. As soon as my
shaft is off, thy foe is beaten." Thus addressed by the high-souled
Kākutstha, Sugriva, along with the four (other) monkeys, experienced
exceeding delight Then with a cheerful countenartce, Sugriva began to
unfold unto Lakshmana’s elder brother the cause of their hostility.




## SECTION IX.


"My elder brother named Vāli—destroyer of foes, was formerly highly
honored both by my father and myself. At the death of our father, the
counsellors, saying,—’This is the eldest son’, made him, who was well
loved (of all), lord of the monkeys in the kingdom. While he was
governing the kingdom which had belonged to his father and grand-father,
I, at all times, in humiliation, remained like a servant. There was one
endued with energy, named Māyāvi. He was the eldest son of Dunduvi.
Formerly there arose a mighty hostility between himself and Vāli. And it
came to pass that one night when all had fallen asleep, (Māyāvi) coming
to Kishkindhā, began to emit roars in great wrath, and challenged Vāli
to an encounter. My brother, who was fast asleep, hearing those dreadful
yells, could not bear them; but at once rushed out vehemently. And as he
rushed out in wrath, for the purpose of slaying that foremost of Asuras,
he was opposed by his wives as well as myself, who humbled himself
before him. But moving them aside, that exceedingly powerful one sallied
out. Thereupon out of affection I also went out with Vāli. And seeing my
brorher and me present from a distance, the Asura, seized with a panic,
fled with speed. And as he was rushing on in fear and when we had
proceeded further, the moon arising, discovered the way. And the Asura,
coming by a capacious and impregnable hole covered with grass (on the
surface), entered it amain; and we remained there. Seeing his enemy
enter the hole, Vāli, overcome by anger, and with his senses agitated,
spoke unto me, saying, "Do thou, O Sugriva, carefully stay at the mouth
of the hole, while I entering in, slay my foe in battle." Hearing his
speech, that subduer of foes was besought by me (for permission to enter
the cave along with him). But making me swear by touching his feet he
entered the cave. And after he had entered the cave, and as I remained
at its mouth, a space of over a complete year rolled away. And seized
with sorrow (I reflected), ’As I do not see my brother, he must be
lost’—and my mind was alarmed, apprehending his death. After a long
time, I saw frothy blood issuing from the cave. Thereat I was greatly
aggrieved. And roars of Asuras also reached my ears; but I could not
hear the cries of my superior, engaged in conflict. And from these signs
concluding my brother to be slain, I, closing the mouth of the cavern
with a crag, huge as a hill, and afflicted with grief, after performing
his watery rites, came (back) to Kishkindhi, O my friend. And although I
carefully concealed (the matter), the counselors heard it all. There
they, assembled together, installed me (in the kingdom). And, as I was
ruling the kingdom with justice, it came to pass that after having slain
his foe, the Dānava, that monkey (Vāli) came to Kishkindhā. Then seeing
me installed, he, with his eyes reddened in wrath, slaying my
counsellors, spoke harsh words to me. And although I was capable of
chastising him, yet my mind influenced by a sense of my brother’s
dignity, did not incline towards that sin. Having slain his foe, he then
entered his city; and I, honoring that high-souled one, duly saluted
him. He withal did not with a glad heart utter his benediction. And, O
lord, I, bowing, touched his feet with my crown; yet from anger Vāli did
not extend to me his grace."




## SECTION X.


Then wishing for my welfare I strove to propitiate my angry brother,
wrought up with wrath, who was seated (there). By good luck it is that
thou hast come off safely; and that thou hast slain the foe. O thou that
rejoicest the forlorn, thou art the only protector of me who am
helpless. I hold this umbrella furnished with many ribs, resembling the
moon risen; as well as this chowri containing hair,—do thou accept my
service. O king, suffering greatly, I remained for a whole year at the
mouth of the cave. And seeing blood issuing from the cave, I had my
heart agitated with grief and my senses extremely overwhelmed. Then
closing up the mouth of the cavern with a mountain summit, and returning
from that place, I again came back to Kishkindhā. Seeing me enter in a
dejected mood, the citizens and counsellors installed me, but it was not
done with my will. Therefore it behoves thee to forgive me. Thou art the
king, O worthy of honor; and I am, as before, ever (thy servant). I was
entrusted with regal power in consequence of thy absence. This kingdom
consisting of courtiers and citizens, remains now rid of its thorns. It
was established in me as a trust. And I protected it as such. Do not get
wroth, O mild one, O destroyer of foes. I beseech thee with bent head,
and, O king, with joined hands. With the view of preventing any one to
wish to conquer this kingdom vacant (of its ruler), the citizens and
counsellors unanimously, by force, entrusted me with regal authority."
As I said this softly, the monkey reproaching me, said unto me ’Fie on
thee,’ and censured me greatly. And bringing together the subjects and
favorite counsellors, spoke unto me, before friends, highly improper
words. ’Ye know that formerly one night the mighty Asura Māyāvi, getting
enraged, challenged me (to a fight) desirous of an encounter with me.
Hearing his speech I sallied out of the palace, and was followed by this
horrible brother of mine. Thereat seeing me with one to assist me, and
finding that we had come upon him, that mighty Asura, fled, seized with
fear. And fleeing on, he (at length) swiftly entered a huge hole.
Knowing that he had entered that dreadful and large cave, I spoke unto
my brother of a crooked presence,—Without slaying (this Asura) I cannot
return to the palace. Do thou wait at the mouth of the cave while I slay
him. _This one is stationed here_—thinking thus, I entered that
inaccessible cave. And as I searched (for the Asura), one entire year
passed away. And that wicked wight who had roused my alarm in
consequence of his disappearance, was (at length) slain by me in one
day, along with his friends. Then as he emitted yells in the
subterranean region, the cave was filled with his blood and it became
difficult to come out of it. Having with ease slain my powerful foe, I
could not find the outlet of the cavern, its mouth having been closed.
Then as I again and again cried "Sugriva, Sugriva," I became exceedingly
sorry for not receiving any reply. Thereat I threw down the stone after
striking it many times with my legs. Then coming out by its mouth, I
have come to this city. Seeking my kingdom, the crafty Sugriva had shut
me up there, forgetting fraternal love.’ Saying this, that monkey, the
shameless Vāli, exiled me with a single cloth on. O Rāghava, I have been
discomfitted by him, and been deprived of my wife. And from fear of him,
I have wandered over the whole earth having forest and seas. And
aggrieved in consequence of my having been deprived of my wife, I have
(at length) entered this best of mountains, Rishyamuka, which for a
certain reason¹⁰⁹ is incapable of being approached by Vāli. Thus have I
mentioned unto thee the great cause of this hostility, O Rāghava,
innocent as I am, I have come by this mighty misfortune. O thou that
inspirest the fear of all creatures, by chastising Vāli it behoveth thee
to grant thy grace unto me, who am tormented with fear in connection
with Vāli, O hero." Thus accosted, that energetic one knowing
righteousness, smiling, began to address Sugriva in words fraught with
morality. These sharpened shafts of mine, resembling the sun, and never
missing, shall furiously fall upon the wicked Vāli. So long as thou dost
not see that stealer of thy wife, so long only shall the impious Vāli of
vile character, live. By what I myself feel, I see that thou hast sunk
in a sea of sorrow. But I will deliver thee; and thou shalt attain both
thy wife as well as this kingdom. Hearing that speech of his, capable of
enhancing joy and manliness, Sugriva overjoyed, spoke those words
informed with high sense.

  ¹⁰⁹ In consequence of Matanga’s curse.—T.




## SECTION XI.


Hearing Rāma’s words capable of enhancing joy and manliness, Sugriva
highly honored the former and extolled him, saying, "Enraged, thou, with
thy sharp and flaming shafts, capable of piercing into the vitals, canst
burn up the worlds, like the sun at the universal dissolution. Heedfully
hearing from me of Vāli’s strength, prowess and fortitude, do thou
afterwards, ascertain what is fit. Before the sun rises, Vāli can easily
range the ocean from west to east and from south to north. Ascending the
tops of mountains, Vāli possessed of prowess throws up their summits,
and then again swiftly holds them. And displaying his strength, Vāli
vehemently crushes in the woods various stout trees. There was one
assuming the shape of buffaloe named Dunduvi, resembling in splendour
the summit of Kailaça. That one possessed of prowess had the strength of
an hundred elephants. That wicked one of a gigantic body inflated by his
prowess and blinded by the boon he had received once went to that lord
of streams—the Sea. Passing beyond the Sea, with waves upon him,—and
containing heaps of gems, he said unto the mighty deep—"Grant me
battle." Thereat the righteous-souled and mighty Ocean arose and, O
king, said these words unto that Asura, who had been urged by Death. O
thou that art skilled in fight, I am not competent to offer thee fight;
but listen to me who will tell thee who shall offer the fight. There is
a monarch of mountains in a mighty forest, —the great refuge of
asceticism, the worker of the weal (of all), an Asura, celebrated by the
name of Himavān containing great cascades and furnished with many
fountains and caves. He can compass thy incomparable pleasure.
Concluding that the ocean was afraid, that foremost of Asuras, presented
himself in the wood of Himavān, like a shaft shot from a bow. Thereupon
Dundhuvi began to throw down many white crags resembling the foremost of
elephants; and sent up shouts. Then resembling white clouds, mild and
possessed of a pleasing shape, Himavān, stationed on the summit, spoke,
"O Dundhuvi, O thou that art attached to righteousness, it behoveth thee
not to distress me. I am the refuge of all those ascetics who are not
expert in military arts." Hearing those words of that intelligent lord
of mountains Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes, said:—"Afraid of me and hence
void of energy if thou art incapable of fighting with me, do thou name
him who is ready to fight with me who am desirous of entering into
conflict." Hearing these words the virtuous-souled Himavān, skilled in
speech, spoke unto that great Asura, exercised with ire. "O greatly wise
one, there lives in Kishkindhā, of incomparable beauty, the mighty and
highly graceful monkey—the son of Sakra, by name Vāli. That mighty wise
one, skilled in warfare, is capable of fighting with thee on equal terms
like unto Namuchi with Vasava. Do thou speedily repair unto him if dost
thou wish for a conflict. He is always expert in military exploits and
is hard to repress." Hearing Himavān’s words, Dundhuvi, inflamed with
ire, went to Kishkindhā—Vāli’s capital. Assuming the figure of a
terrible buffaloe, with sharpened horns like unto a cloud big with
water, ranging on the sky in the rainy season, and approaching the gate
of Kishkindhā that highly powerful one set up a terrible roar, shakiag
the earth like unto the sound of a kettle-drum. Like onto an elephant he
felled, out of haughtiness, the trees around, and rent the earth with
his hoofs scraping it with his horns. Vāli was in the female-apartment
at that time, and unable to bear the sound came out with his wives like
onto the Moon with stars. Thereupon that lord of monkeys and other wild
animals, spoke openly unto Dundhuvi, saying, "O Dundhuvi, obstructing
this my city-gate, why dost thou set up a terrible roar? Dost thou know
my mighty strength? Do thou save thy own life." Hearing those words of
that intelligent lord of monkeys, Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes spoke:—"O
hero, it becometh thee not to speak thus before thy wives. Do thou enter
into conflict with me and thy prowess shall be ascertained thereafter.
Or I shall suppress my wrath for this night and do thou, O monkey, enjoy
till the rise of the Sun. Embracing all the monkeys, inviting all thy
friends, do thou, that art the lord of the monkey herds, honor them with
gifts. Do thou survey Kiskindhā and make thy children kings. And do thou
enjoy with thy wives—it is me that shall crush down thy pride. He, who
destroyeth a person who is given up to drinking, reckless, emaciated and
deprived of weapons, and one like thee, sunk in the abyss of
voluptuousness, committeth the sin consequent upon the destruction of an
embryo," Whereto replied Vāli, laughing, unto that wicked lord of
Asuras, leaving aside all his wives, headed by Tāra. "If thou art not
afraid of fighting, do not consider me as one given up to drinking only.
Do thou regard this my attachment as a draught in this conflict, to be
drunk by the heroes." Saying this, Vāli, taking his golden garland,
conferred on him by his father Mahendra, addressed himself for the
conflict. Holding him by the horns, Vāli, that lord of monkeys, setting
up a terrible roar, hurled Dundhuvi resembling a mountain. And bellowing
a thundering voice, Vāli crushed (him) down. And blood began to trickle
down from the pores of his ears. Both of them desired to subdue each
other—and thus there arose a terrible conflict between Vāli and
Dundhuvi. Thereupon fought Vāli equalling Sakra in prowess, by fists
knees, legs, stones and trees. And thus there was a skirmish between the
monkey chief and the Asura. And in this conflict Asura’s strength was
greatly reduced, while that of Sakra’s son was highly enhanced. Holding
up Dundhuvi he threw him on the ground. And in that dreadful skirmish
Dundhuvi was greatly reduced. And there was a profusion of blood falling
from the ears of that one crushed down. Thereupon that one of mighty
arms fell down to the earth and breathed his last. And taking up with
his arms that lifeless one, the mighty Vāli hurled him with great force
at distance of a _yojana_. While thus thrown down by force, drops of
blood, falling from his mouth, driven by the wind, fell upon the asylum
of the great Saint Matanga. O great one, beholding the drops of blood
there, the great ascetic, angered, thought within himself—"Who might be
the author of this sprinkling of blood? Who is that wicked-souled,
vicious-minded, stupid person, who hath all on a sudden sprinkled me
with blood?" Saying this, that best of saints issued out (of the
hermitage) and surveyed a lifeless buffalo lying on the earth, like unto
a huge mountain. And apprehending by virtue of his asceticism that this
hath been committed by a monkey, he imprecated a mighty curse on the
perpetrator (of that iniquitous deed).—"He shall not enter here who hath
spoiled the sanctity of my forest with showers of blood. And surely he
shall be killed (on entering). Forsooth shall that wicked one cease to
exist if he strideth within a _yojana_ around my asylum, who hath felled
these trees by throwing the body of the Asura. His counsellors or any
one related to him, who shall resort to this my forest (shall meet with
the self-same fate). They shall not live here; hearing this from me let
them take their own ways. And even if they live here, forsooth, shall I
curse them too. This my forest is being protected by me every day like
unto my own son— and the monkeys are always used to destroy its leaves,
trees and roots. Forgive them I to-day—but if I find any tomorrow, he
shall be turned into stone for many thousand years." Hearing those words
of the saint, the monkey herd issued out (of the forest). And beholding
them (coming out of the forest) Vāli spoke—"Why have ye all—the dwellers
of the Matanga forest approached me—Is it all well with you?" Thereupon
they related unto Vāli, wearing a golden garland, the cause of the
Saint’s curse by him and other monkeys. Hearing those words, Vāli
approached that great ascetic and solicited him with folded hands.
Disregarding him, the ascetic entered into his asylum and Vāli was
overwhelmed with the fear of curse. O Lord of men, afraid of the curse
that monkey chief purposed to repair unto the mount Rishyamuka. Knowing
for certain, O Rāma, that he shall not enter this forest, I have been
living here with my ministers, devoid of fear and grief. Here is the
collection of Dundhuvi’s bones, killed on account of his own
haughtiness, resembling a huge mountain. These are the seven huge _Sala_
trees, clothed in branches, which Vāli could simultaneously divest of
leaves by virtue of his prowess. I have related unto thee, O Rāma, the
incomparable prowess of his. Do thou tell me now, O hero, how canst thou
destroy him in the conflict?" Unto Sugriva speaking thus, Lakshmana
smiling replied:—"Performing what, shalt thou confide in (Rāma’s
ability) to destroy Vāli?" Thereupon Sugriva bespake him—" These seven
_Sala_ trees, before thee, the mighty Vāli, formerly pierced, all at a
time, with one shaft. If Rāma can aim at one of these only with one
arrow and if he can, O Lakshmana, throw the bones of this dead buffalo
at a distance of two hundred bows—I shall consider Vāli slain." Having
addressed Rāma thus, Sugriva, having blood-red eyes, thought aside for a
moment and again spoke unto Kākuthstha:—"He is heroic and proud of his
prowess—his heroism and strength are known all over the world. He is a
mighty monkey and incapable of being repressed in a battle. His actions
are such as are above the power of the celestials. Revolving them within
myself and terrified I have repaired to this mount Rishyamuka. And
thinking of that lord of monkeys, unconquerable and irrepressible I dare
not leave this Rishyamuka. And exercised with fear and anxiety,
therefore, I have been wandering in this mighty forest along with my
devoted counsellors, headed by Hanumān. And having secured in thee a
worthy and sincere friend, O best of men, O thou that art loving unto
thy friends, I have taken thy shelter like unto Himāvat himself.
Cognizant am I of the prowess of my highly powerful and wicked brother,
but I have never witnessed thine in a conflict, O Rāghava. I do not
compare thee with Vāli, nor do I disregard or frighten thee—forsooth
have I greatly been alarmed by his terrible actions. O Rāghava, thy
words, patience and figure are the proofs of thy heroism—truly do they
bespeak of thy valour like unto fire hidden by ashes." Hearing those
words of the high-souled Sugriva, Rāma, smiling, spoke unto that monkey,
saying—"O monkey, if thou dost not confide in my valour, soon shall I
create thy confidence about my warlike abilities." Having thus addressed
Sugriva and consoling him, the highly powerful Rāghava, of mighty
arms—Lakshmana’s elder brother, lifting up easily with his thumb the
dried frame of that Asura— Dundhuvi—hurled it at a distance of ten
_yojanas_. Beholding that Asura’s body thrown thus, Sugriva, again
addressed unto the heroic Rāma, before Lakshmana and the monkey herd,
the following pregnant words:—"Friend, formerly this body was wet and
corpulent, and it was thrown with great difficulty by my brother Vāli,
mad with voluptuousness. And O Rāghava, it is now divested of flesh and
hence light like unto grass and consequently it has been hurled by thee
with ease, O descendant of Raghu. And unable am I to ascertain who is
the mightier? There is a good deal of difference, O Rāghava, between a
body, wet and dried. There is still doubt, O worshipful one, which of
you is the mightier? Truly shall thy strength be manifested in the
piercing of one of these _Sala_ trees. Having stringed the bow like unto
the trunk of an elephant and stretching it to thy ears, do thou shoot
this mighty arrow. Doubt that is none that this arrow flung by thee
shall bore this _Sala_ tree. There is no need of discussion any more; do
thou perform O king, what dost thou think proper for me, contracted, as
thou hast, friendship with me, with a solemn vow. Like unto the sun
amongst the planets, like unto the Himalaya amongst the mountains, like
unto the lion amongst the quadrupeds thou art the foremost of men in
prowess."




## SECTION XII.


Wearing those pleasant words of Sugriva, the highly effulgent Rāma, to
create his confidence, took up his bow. That one, conferring honors upon
others, holding his terrible bow and a shaft, darted it towards the
_Sāla_, filling all the quarters with a sound. The arrow, clear as the
gold itself, hurled by that one of mighty strength, perforating the
trees,entered into the mountainous expanse and the sevenfold regions of
the earth. And that shaft, gifted with wonderful velocity, piercing all
the trees entered again into the quiver. Having beheld those seven trees
bored by Rāma’s arrow, that monkey chief attained to an excess of
surprise. Thereupon Sugriva, exceedingly glad, and delighted with his
actions, bowing down his head on the earth and stretching his ornamented
person on the ground, addressed with clasped hands, that heroic
descendant of Raghu—Rāma, the foremost of those conversant with
religious lore, with the following pious words—"O best of men, O lord,
what of Vāli, thou art capable of destroying with thy arrows, in the
conflict, even the celestials headed by Indra. O Kākutstha, who can
stand before thee in a battle, who hath pierced the seven trees, and the
mountain, and the earth with one arrow? Obtaining thee as my friend like
unto Mahendra and Varuna, my grief hath been removed and I have attained
to an excess of delight. Do thou, O Kākutstha, even to-day destroy, for
my welfare, my brother Vāli. This I do pray unto thee with folded
hands." Thereupon embracing- Sugriva, of a pleasant countenance and like
unto Lakshmana, the highly wise Rāma spoke unto him, saying, "Soon shall
we repair unto Kishkindhā.—Do thou go before, Sugriva, and invite thy
false brother, Vāli, to battle." Thereupon proceeding quickly to
Kishkindhā, Vāli’s capital—they all stood waiting in that dense forest,
hiding themselves under the trees. With a view to call Vāli, Sugriva,
tying fast his cloth (around the waist) set up a terrible roar, as if
rending the sky (therewith). Hearing the terrible uproar of his brother,
the mighty Vāli, highly angered, issued out of his city, like unto the
Sun from the western shores (where he sets). Thereupon there arose a
mighty conflict between Vāli and Sugriva like unto the planets Mercury
and Mars fighting with each other on the sky. The two brothers,
exercised with ire, struck each other with palms like unto Acani and
with fists resembling adamant. Thereupon Rāma, with bow in hand, beheld
those two heroes resembling each other, like unto two Açwins. And
Rāghava did not discharge that mortal shaft untill he could perfectly
ascertain who was Vāli and who was Sugriva. In the mean time, being
defeated by Vāli, Sugriva fled away and not beholding Rāghava, proceeded
towards Rishyamuka. And wearied, worn out with blows, and having his
person bathed in blood, he, followed by Vāli, angered, entered that
mighty forest. Beholding him enter that forest, the highly powerful Vāli
could not pursue him there for fear of the curse but said:—"Thou art
released to-day." And Rāghava too, with his brother and Hanumān, entered
that forest, where the monkey chief Sugriva was. Beholding Rāma approach
with Lakshmana, Sugriva, stricken with shame and casting his looks on
the earth, addressed him poorly, with the following words:—"Accosting me
with ’do thou call (Vāli),’ displaying thy valour and making me struck
by the enemy, what improper, conduct hast thou shown by me? Thou
shouldst have spoken me then truly, O Rāghava, —"I shall not destroy
Vāli" and I would not have gone there. The high-souled Sugriva speaking
thus poorly, Rāghava again spoke unto him, saying:—"Do thou hear, O
Sugriva, O worshipful one, why I did not discharge my arrow then. By
ornaments, dress, stature and movements thyself and Vāli are just the
same, O Sugriva. By voice, by words, by looks or by valour, O monkey, I
could not make out any distinction. O best of monkeys, being thus
surprised by the similarity of your countenances I could not discharge
that foe-destroying and quick-coursing shaft. I was so afraid of thy
resemblance with Vāli that I thought that lest the mortal shaft might
destroy thee. O hero, O lord of monkeys, if any disaster befalleth thee,
who art already overwhelmed with miseries, through my ignorance or
childishness, they shall be known all over the world. Mighty is the sin
that ariseth from the destruction of one who hath been offered shelter.
Myself, Lakshmana, and that exquisitely fine damsel—Sitā—are all at thy
service—thou art our only refuge in this forest. Do thou again enter
into conflict, therefore, and do not fear, O monkey. And do thou behold
even, in this very moment, Vāli, moving restlessly on the breast of the
earth, wounded by my shaft. Do thou make some mark on thy person, O lord
of monkeys, by which I shall be able to recognize thee when engaged in a
duel (with thy brother). O Lakshmana, plucking this auspicious _Gaja_
flower, do thou put it round the neck of the high-souled Sugriva."
Thereat that highly graceful one with the garland around his neck
appeared like unto a cloud. And appearing in a graceful person and
attentive to Rāma’s words he again entered Kishkindhā with him.




## SECTION XIII.


Thereupon the high-souled Rāma, along with Sugriva, proceeded from the
mount Rishyamuka to Kishkiudhā, maintained by Vāli’s prowess, raising up
his gold crested mighty bow and taking his battle arrows like unto
Aditya. The mighty Sugriva, bending low, proceeded before the
high-souled Rāma and Lakshmana. They were followed by the heroic
Hanumān, the mighty Nala and Neela, and the highly powerful Tāra, the
leader of the monkey herd. They beheld as they proceeded, trees, lowered
down with the weight of flowers, rivers of clear water flowing to the
ocean, mountain hollows, hills, caves, cavities, and principal peaks and
charming rills. They beheld on their way, pools filled with water clear
as _Baidurya_ and beautified with lotuses—full blown and buds, and
resounded with the cries of _Kārandhabas_, swans, geese, _Banchulas_,
water-fowls, _Chakrabakas_, and various other birds. They surveyed all
around in the forest-land, deer ranging fearlessly at large and grazing
on tender grass. They beheld frightful wild elephants having white
teeth, ranging alone—the destroyers of river banks and enemies of pools.
And observing many an infuriated monkey like unto elephants, resembling
so many moveable mountains riving the mountainous expanses crusted with
dust, and many other wild beasts and birds the followers of Sugriva
wended their way. They proceeding quickly, Rāma, the descendant of
Raghu, beholding the forest filled with trees, spake unto Sugriva,
saying—"These trees skirted by plantain groves, dense as a collection of
clouds, appear as clouds in the sky. Great is my curiosity, O friend, to
learn what are these. And I wish to have my curiosity removed by thee."
Hearing the words of the high-souled Rāghava, Sugriva began to describe
that great forest.—"In this extensive asylum, O Rāghava, removing the
toil (of the travellers) filled with gardens and trees and abounding in
delicious fruits, roots and water, dwelt seven Saints, having control
over their senses. Those seven Saints, dwelling on the mountain, passed
days and nights in water with their heads down and after seven nights
used to live upon air. In this wise, passing seven hundred years they
repaired bodily unto heaven. By virtue of their asceticism, this asylum
is walled by trees and incapable of being conquerred even by Indra, the
celestials and the Asuras. Birds or other wild animals do not enter this
asylum; whoever entereth this by mistake never returneth. There is
audible, O Rāghava, the sound of the dressing of Apsarās. their
sweet-winged accents and that of their music and drums; and herein
pervadeth the celestial fragrance. Hereburneth the fire _Tretā_; and the
smoke and cloud sable like unto the wings of a pigeon envelope the tops
of the trees. And there appear the trees, having their tops saturated
with smoke and cloaked with clouds, like unto so many _Baidurya_ hills.
Do thou, O Rāghava, O virtuous-souled one, make obeisance unto them
along with thy brother Lakshmana, with concentrated heart and folded
palms. There resteth no sin in their persons, O Rāma, who bow unto those
self-controlled Saints." Thereupon Rāma, along with his younger brother
Lakshmana, made obeisance unto those high-souled ones. And having paid
homage (unto the sacred memory of those great ones) the virtuous-souled
Rāma, his (younger) brother Lakshmana, Sugriva and other monkeys,
proceeded with delighted hearts. And wending a distant way from that
hermitage of the seven great ones, they beheld Kishkindhā, hard to
conquer and occupied by Vāli. Thereupon, Rāma, his younger brother and
the monkeys taking their weapons, entered, to encompass the destruction
of their enemies, the city (of Kishkindhā) reared by the prowess of
Indra’s son.




## SECTION XIV.


They all, repairing quickly unto Kishkindhā, Vāli’s capital, stood
waiting in the dense forest, hiding themselves behind the trees. Casting
his looks all around in the forest, Sugriva, having a huge neck and fond
of woods, became exceedingly enraged. Setting up a terrible uproar and
rending the sky with his cry (Sugriva) encircled by his kinsmen, invited
(Vāli) to battle. Thereupon roaring like unto a huge cloud, preceded by
a mighty wind, Sugriva, gifted with leonine motion, and resembling the
newly risen Sun, finding Rāma expert in business, spake unto him,
saying:—"Thou hast readied Kishkindhā, Vāli’s capital, adorned with
gold, filled with pennons and instruments and surrounded by monkeys. Do
thou make good thy promise, O hero, thou hadst made before to encompass
the destruction of Vāli like unto the season making the creepers filled
with fruits." Being thus accosted by Sugriva, the virtuous-souled
Rāghava, the slayer of foes, addressed him with the following
words:—"Uprooting the _Gaja_ creeper, Lakshmana, hath placed it around
thy neck as an emblem (to distinguish thee). Thou dost appear more
beautiful, O hero, with this creeper around thy neck like unto the sun
on the sky engarlanded by the stars. I shall, O monkey, by the discharge
of one shaft in the conflict destroy thy fear and enmity proceeding from
Vāli. Do thou show me, O Sugriva, thy enemy, in the guise of a brother.
Wounded (by my shaft) Vāli shall roll in the dust in the forest. And if
regaining his life he comes in thy view, do thou leave this field,
showering abuses upon me. Thou didst behold seven _Talas_ riven by a
single shaft of mine and did thou therefore consider Vāli destroyed
to-day by my prowess in the conflict. Though fallen in distress before,
I never spoke an untruth, being always guided by an inclination to
acquire virtue. Like unto the deity of hundred sacrifices causing the
rice fields bring forth their fruits by means of profuse showers, I
shall fulfill my promise by dint of my prowess. Do thou therefore
renounce all doubts about it. Do thou call Vāli, wearing a golden
garland. Do thou make such a sound, O Sugriva, as may bring out that
monkey chief (from his city). He hath subdued his breath, is proud of
victory and fond of warfare; thou couldst not repress him before.
Forsooth that Vāli shall come out, leaving the company (of his wives).
Hearing the war cry of his enemy, he shall never put up with it,
specially, as he boasteth of his prowess before his wives." Hearing
Rāma’s words. Sugriva, having a gold-yellow hue, set up a terrible roar,
as if riving the sky. Terrified by that sound, the kine, losing their
countenance do move hither and thither like unto damsels, oppressed on
account of their kings’ neglecting (to protect them). And the deer fly
away like unto the horses defeated in a warfare. And the birds fall down
on the earth, like unto planets, losing their purity. Thereupon
confiding in Rāma’s words, that son, of Suryya (Sun) having his energy
enhanced by means of his prowess resembling the ocean agitated by the
wind, began to roar like unto cloud.




## SECTION XV.


While residing in the female apartment, Vāli heard the uproar of that
high-souled Sugriva—his wrathful brother. And hearing that mighty roar,
shaking the whole world of creation, his pride was in no time, crushed
and he attained an excess of ire. Thereupon, Vāli, having a golden hue,
greatly exercised with wrath, instantly lost the effulgence of his
person like unto the sun possessed by Rāhu. And looking terrible by his
teeth and having eyes resembling burning fire in consequence of ire he
appeared like unto a pond, having the lotuses thereof uprooted with
their stalks and fibres. And hearing that unbearable sound, the monkey,
issued out speedily, as if riving the earth with his foot marks.
Embracing him warmly and showing her affection, Tārā, afraid and
mortified, addressed him with the following words, presaging his future
welfare:—"Do thou renounce, O hero, this thy ire, coming like the course
of a river, like unto one, leaving aside the garland, which he used in
the night, after rising from bed. O monkey chief, do thou engage with
him in conflict, tomorrow. O hero, thy enemy is very insignificant and
hence there will be no deterioration on thy part. Thy hastily issuing
out doth not please me; do thou hear, why I do prevent thee. Formerly
this Sugriva invited thee angrily to battle and being defeated and
wounded by thee fled away. That one, who had been defeated and harassed
by thee formerly, is now calling thee. Indeed it hath excited my fear.
His pride, his energy, and his terrible uproar do indicate that there is
nothing insignificant (at the bottom). I do not think Sugriva has come
here without any to assist him. Forsooth he hath taken shelter of some
body, and securing which he hath been setting up such a terrible uproar.
That monkey is clever by nature and gifted with intellect. And Sugriva
shall not desire friendship with any one without having a test of his
prowess. Hearken, O hero, I shall relate unto thee today, the auspicious
words, I heard ere this, from the prince Angada. He hath related unto me
all about Sugriva, what be heard from bis emmissaries while journeying
in the forest. The two heroic sons of the king of Ayodhyā—Rāma and
Lakshmana, incapable of being defeated in a battle and born in the race
of Ikshawkus, have repaired unto woods. To accomplish Sugriva’s welfare,
those two heroes, hard to repress, have come here. He is the main stay
of thy brother in the battle; Rāma hath sprung up like unto the fire of
dissolution and is the repressor of enemy’s prowess. He is the refuge of
the saints and the prime shelter of the afflicted. He is the protector
of those grinded by their enemies and is the only possessor of fame. He
is gifted with knowledge and intellect and ever abideth by his sire’s
commandments. Like unto Himalaya, the king of mountains, containing
diverse metals, he is the mine of various accomplishments. It doth not
behove thee therefore to enter into conflict with that high-souled Rāma,
incomparable in prowess and hard to conquer in battle. Hearken, O hero,
I desire to speak something more —I do not wish to excite thy wrath. Do
thou instantly confer upon Sugriva, the dignity of heir apparent (to thy
throne). O hero, O king; do not quarrel with thy younger brother. I do
consider it thy welfare to contract friendship with Rāma and regain
Sugriva’s affections, renouncing all thy inimical feelings. This thy
younger brother, even when remaining at a distance, should always be
maintained by thee. Whether by thee, or at a distance, he is always thy
best friend—I do not find his equal on earth. By conferring on him gifts
and honors do thou receive him back. And do thou renounce thy enmity and
let him sit by thee. Methinks, that large-necked Sugriva is thy best
friend—there is no other resource for thee than to secure thy brother’s
friendship. If thou dost wish to go by my desire, if thou dost regard me
as thy well-wisher, do thou perform what I do request thee for thy
welfare. Be pleased and hear my beneficial words. It doth not behove
thee to yield to the influence of ire —thy conflict with that son of the
king; of Koçala, gifted with the prowess of Sakra, will not conduce to
thy welfare." Thereupon Tārā spoke unto Vāli these suitable and
well-meaning words—but they did not satisfy him, possessed by Kāla, as
he was, on the eve of his destruction.




## SECTION XVI.


After Tārā, having a moon-like countenance, had spoken thus, Vāli,
remonstrated with her and said—"O thou of exquisite loveliness, my
brother, and specially my enemy, is roaring lowly and haughtily—and how
shall I put up with it? O timid damsel, heroes, who have never been
defeated and have never fled away from the battle field, had rather meet
with death than put up with this ignominy. I am incapable of bearing
this proud uproar of Sugriva, having a defective neck and desirous of
entering into conflict with me. Fearing danger from Rāghava, thou needst
not entertain any anxiety on my account. Why shall that virtuous-souled
and grateful Rāma perpetrate iniquity? Do thou therefore return with my
other wives. Why do thou follow me again? Thou hast already shown thy
friendship and respect for me. I shall repairing thither, only fight
with Sugriva. I shall crush down his pride and not destroy him. I shall
deal with him mercifully in the battle as thou dost wish and being
struck with fists and trees he shall fly away. Forsooth, that
vicious-souled one shall not be able to withstand my pride and
proficient skill in warfare. O Tārā, thou hast already displayed thy
attachment unto me by giving me good counsels. By my life, do thou go
back with the other members of my household, I shall only return after
bringing about the discomfiture of my brother in the battle." Thereupon,
Tārā, dexterous and of sweet accents, embracing Vāli, went round him,
with tears trickling from her eyes. And having performed _Sastayana_ or
the ceremony of benediction, that one gifted with a knowledge of
Mantras, and desirous of Vāli’s success, went, overwhelmed with grief,
to the inner-apartment in the company of other females. After Tārā had
departed to her own quarters with her female companions, he issued out
of the city sighing like an enraged serpent. And the quick-paced Vāli,
exceedingly wroth, sighing, cast his looks around with a view to behold
his enemy. And that highly efiulgent one espied Sugriva, having a golden
yellow hue, tightly clothed, standing firm on the earth and shining like
unto burning gold. And beholding Sugriva stationed thus, the greatly
enraged Vāli, of mighty arms, put on his clothes tightly well. Highly
powerful and closely habited, he, clinching his fists, proceeded towards
Sugriva, and waited for the action. Sugriva too, clinching his fist and
exceedingly wroth, proceeded towards Vāli, wearing a golden garland. And
beholding Sugriva, adept in warfare, having his eyes reddened with ire,
advance quickly, Vāli spake:—"Behold, I have clinched this terrible
fist, arranging close my fingers; and one blow from me will take away
thy life." Being accosted thus by Vāli, Sugriva, exercised with wrath,
spake unto him, saying,—"This my fist shall strike thee on thy head
taking away thy life." Thereupon being struck by Vāli, waxing wroth and
approaching him quickly he began to vomit out gore like unto a mountain
having springs. And Vāli too was struck down by Sugriva, fearlessly
taking up a _Sāla_ tree, like unto a mountain clapped by a thunderbolt.
Being thus smitten by the tree and overwhelmed with the strike of _Sāla_
he was troubled like unto a heavily laden boat in the midst of an ocean.
And these (two brothers) gifted with mighty strength and prowess and
motion of _Suparna_, and having huge persons fought with each other like
unto the Sun and Moon on the sky. They were inimical to each other and
intent on finding their mutual dark sides. And Vāli, gifted with
strength and prowess, fared better in the conflict, and that highly
powerful son of Sun—Sugriva, was worsted. And having his pride crushed
down by Vāli and strength greatly reduced, Sugriva in anger pointed him
out unto Rāma. Thereupon there took place a mighty conflict between them
like unto _Vitra_ and _Vasava_ by means of trees with branches, hills,
nails, hard as thunderbolts, fists, knees, legs and arms. And these two
monkeys ranging in the forest, fought with each other, having their
persons bathed in blood, and roaring like unto clouds. And Rāghava again
and again beheld the weak points of that monkey chief Sugriva, losing
his strength by and by. And beholding that chief of monkeys greatly
distressed, the highly powerful and heroic Rāma cast his looks upon his
shaft, having the destruction of Vāli in view. And fixing on his bow an
arrow resembling a serpent, he stretched it like unto Death drawing out
his cycle of time. Being terrified by the sound of his stringing of the
bow the birds and beasts, dismayed as on the eve of dissolution, fled
away into different quarters. And a mighty shaft, like onto thunderbolt
and resembling flaming fire, being hurled by Rāma, alighted on the
breast of Vāli. Being wounded by that shaft that highly powerful chief
of monkeys, gifted with prowess fell down on the earth. Like unto
Sakra’s banner in the full-moon of Aswin, Vāli, with his throat choked
with vapor, losing all sense and sighing hard, fell dead down to the
ground. As the great God Hara emitted forth fire with smoke from his
mouth, so that best of men like unto Death hurled an excellent, flaming
and foe-destroying shaft, resembling gold and death itself. Thereupon
being bathed in blood that son of Vāsava, fell senseless on the ground,
in the conflict like unto a blossoming Asoka growing on a hill and
Sakra’s banner struck down on the earth.




## SECTION XVII.


Thereupon Vāli, adept in warfare, wounded by Rāma’s shaft, fell down to
the ground like unto a felled tree. Ornamented with burning gold, he
stretched the whole length of his person on the ground like unto the
banner of the Lord of celestials, loosened and thrown (off the chariot).
That lord of monkeys being levelled to the ground, his kingdom appeared
like unto the sky, shorn of the Moon. Though struck down to the earth,
neither vitality, effulgence nor prowess did renounce the body of that
high-souled one. That excellent gold and jewel-crested garland conferred
on him by Sakra maintained the vitality, effulgence and prowess of that
lord of monkeys. Being adorned with that golden garland, that heroic
lord, of monkey-herds, appeared like unto an evening cloud. Though
felled to the ground, his beauty appeared as if divided into three,
namely, his garland, his body and the shaft piercing his heart. The
arrow thrown off Rāma’s bow pointing out unto him the way to the
celestial region, became an excellent means to that hero. Beholding the
broad-chested and mighty-armed Vāli, Mahendra’s son, wearing a golden
garland and having a flaming countenance and yellow eyes, thus struck
down to the earth, resembling a flameless fire in the field of battle,
like unto Yayati, slipped from the abode of the celestials on the wane
of his peity, like unto a tree falling down to the earth at the time of
Dissolution, hard to repress as Mahendra himself, incapable to withstand
like Upendra, Rāma, followed by Lakshmana, approached and beheld him.
And paying respects unto that hero falling on the earth like unto a
flameless fire and eying him again and again those two highly powerful
brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana neared him. And beholding that highly
powerful Rāghava and Lakshmana, Vāli addressed them with the following
bold and pious words. And thereupon Vāli, of mitigated prowess, waning
vitality, motionless and stretched on the ground, spoke unto Rāma, proud
of warfare, saying these pregnant words.—"What merit hast thou reaped by
destroying me, who was not engaged in fight with thee? I was exercised
with ire, being engaged in conflict (with another person) and for thee I
have met with destruction. People speak highly of thee, O Rāma, on this
earth, describing thee as coming of a high family, gifted with manliness
and prowess, ever engaged in the welfare of thy subjects, compassionate,
energetic, of firm resolution and knowing time. Punishment, control of
passions, forgiveness, piety, firmness, truth, prowess and suppression
of the wicked—these all are the royal virtues. And knowing thy high
pedigree, and all these thy accomplishments I approached Sugriva with a
hostile intention, albeit prevented by Tārā. Before I saw thee I had
thought within myself:—’Forsooth Rāma shall not destroy me, engaged as I
am with another person and hence not prepared to fight with him.’ I do
now know thee as one who hath spoliated his soul through impious
actions, feigning religion while in truth an irreligious person,
resorting to all vicious deeds, like unto a well crusted with grass,
unrighteous while passing under the cloak of honesty and religion like
unto a hidden fire. I have not done thee any wrong either in thy kingdom
or in thy city. Nor have I passed by thee. Why hast thou then destroyed
me, who am a monkey ranging always in the woods, living on fruits and
roots and who have come here to fight with anpther person? It appears
that thou art of a kingly father and of a graceful countenance. And, O
king, there are marks of piety on thy person. Who, born in the race of
Kshatryas, versed in religious lore, having his doubts removed and marks
of peity on his person, perpetrates such an iniquitous deed? Thou art
born in the family of Raghus and known all over the world as being
pious. Being clothed in righteousness why dost thou commit such an
unrighteous act? Chastisement, charity, forgiveness, piety, truthfulness
firm- ness, prowess and the punishment of the iniquitous are the virtues
of a king, O prince. We are, O Rāma, wild beasts ranging in the forest
and living on roots and fruits—our nature is such—but thou art a man, O
king. Land, gold and silver are the causes of dissension. But who is
there who is avaricious enough to get by our forest habitations and
fruits? The royal virtue consists in humbly and freely administering
discipline, favour and punishment. Kings by no means, should follow
their whims. But thou art angry and unsteady by nature, capricious,
perfectly narrow-minded in the discharge of thy royal duties and dost
use thy bow and shafts (any where and every time). Thou hast no
attachment for virtue, no comprehension of right things and art always
guided by thy passions albeit thou art a lord of men. O Kākutstha,
destroying me sinless, with thy shaft and perpetrating such a digraceful
act, how shalt thou relate it unto the pious. Those, who commit treason,
destroy Brahmins and kine, who are theives and always engaged in the
destruction of animals, and who are athiests and marry before their
elder brothers are married, do all go to hell. The villainous, the
avaricious, those who kill their friends and elope with their
preceptor’s wives, do always visit the land of the vicious. And there is
not the least doubt about it. My skin is npt worthy of thy touch and my
bones and hairs should always be avoided by the Virtuous. And my flesh
is not worthy of being eaten by persons of thy piety. A hedge-hog a
porcupine, an iguana, a hare and a tortoise—these five animals only,
having five toes, are worthy of being eaten by the Kshatryas and
Brahmins, O Rāghava. The wise, O R£ma, do not touch my skin and bones
and my flesh is not worthy of being taken—I am that (monkey) having five
toes who have been killed by thee. Alas! disregarding the well meaning
and truthful words of Tārā, I have placed myself under the control of
_Kāla_ (Death). O Kākuthstha, the Earth hath got thee as her husband
like unto a good natured damsel being wedded to a husband who hath
forsaken his own religion. How art thou, who art wicked, narrow-minded,
a liar and ever intent upon bringing about others’ misfortune, born of
the loins of the high-souled Daçaratha? I have been killed by an
elephant—Rāma, disregarding the virtue of the pious, breaking the chord
of character, and neglecting the goad of religion. Perpetrating this
inauspicious, and improper act, blamed of the worthy what shalt thou
speak unto the pious when thou shalt return in their company? The
prowess, thou hast displayed towards me, careless, O Rāma thou dost
never employ for the suppression of the iniquitous. O son of a king,
hadst thou fought with me openly thou wouldst have, forsooth, seen the
abode of Death being killed by me. O Rāma, like unto a serpent
destroying persons asleep, thou, that art under the control of vice,
hast killed me, who am hard to repress, keeping thyself out of my sight
in the battle. I have been killed by thee, desirous of encompassing
Sugriva’s well being. Hadst thou apprized me of thy object before, I
would have got thee thy Maithili in the course of a day, and brought, by
the neck, that vicious-souled Rākshasa—Rāvana, the ravisher of thy
spouse without putting an end to his life in the battle. Whether in the
deep ocean or in the region under the earth, I shall bring thy Maithili
like unto an _Ashyatari_.¹¹⁰ It is perfectly proper that Sugriva shall
inherit my kingdom on my ascension to heaven. And it is equally improper
that I have been viciously killed by thee in the battle. Every one in
time meets with death and hence there is nothing to be sorry for me. But
do thou think of a proper reply thou shalt give to the people (when
asked about the cause of my destruction)." Having said this, that
high-souled Son of monkey-chief, greatly distressed being wounded by
(Rāma’s) shaft and having his countenance dried up, became silent,
fixing his look upon Rāma, resembling the sun.

  ¹¹⁰ Here is an allusion. A prince of _Daityas_, named Hayagriva, stole
      the _Vedas_ at the end of _Kalpa_; in the recovery of them he was
      slain by Vishnu after his descent as _Matshya_.—T.




## SECTION XVIII.


And thus Rāma was addressed by Vāli, wounded and senseless, with those
modest, pious and auspicious words. And being thus reproached he spoke
unto that excellent lord of monkeys, gifted with virtue and other
accomplishments, resembling the Sun shorn of its lustre, a cloud which
has already discharged its waters and fire extinguished.—"Not cognizant
of virtue, knowledge, passion and custom, why dost thou blame me like a
child? Why dost thou purpose to address me thus out of fickleness,
consequent upon thy monkeyhood not asking thy wise elders recognized by
the preceptors? This land, abounding in hills and woods, belongs to the
Ikswakus. Along with it was conferred on them the power of administering
favour and chastisement unto beasts, birds and human beings. The
upright, virtuous and truthful king Bharata, cognizant of virtue,
knowledge and passion and ever engaged in adminstering favour and
punishment, governs this kingdom. That king is said to be cognizant of
time and place; in him dwelleth modesty, truthfulness, prowess and a
love for discipline. Ourselves and other kings, being commanded by him
to practise piety, have been journeying in this wide world desirous of
multiplying virtue. That foremost of monarchs, Bharata—lover of virtue,
governing this entire earth, who dares perpetrate an iniquity? Stationed
in the excellent virtue of our own and placing Bharata’ s commandments
on our heads, we shall consider how we shall punish them who go astray
(from the path of virtue). Thou hast oppressed virtue and perpetrated a
gross iniquity. Thou hast placed thyself under the control of thy
passions and deviated from the track of royal duties. The elder brother,
father, and the instructor—these three should always be regarded in the
light of a father if they tread the paths of virtue and morality. A
younger brother, a son and an accomplished follower should always be
regarded as sons. And virtue is always at the bottom of all such
considerations. O monkey, the religion of the good is indeed very subtle
and can comprehend great things—the immortal soul can understand what is
good or bad. Fickle as thou art, how canst thou comprehend what is
proper, consulting with thy monkey companions who are equally stupid and
light-hearted, like unto one, born blind, leading with another such? I
do fairly speak unto thee that it is not anger only that has led me to
bring about thy destruction. Do thou consider why I have killed
thee—thou hast ravished thy brother’s wife renouncing that ever-existing
virtue. Thou, the perpetrator of many evil deeds, hast got by Rumā, the
wife of thy brother —the high-souled Sugriva. O monkey, thou hast thus
violated the path of virtue. And thus I have punished thee who hast
ravished thy elder brother’s spouse. O thou, the leader of
monkey-herds—I find no other alternative than to punish him who acts
against humanity and violates the sacred sanctions of custom. I am a
Kshatrya coming of a high pedigree. I cannot put up with thy immoral
conduct. _Sastras_ sanction the destruction of one who under the
influence of passion ravishes his own daughter, sister and younger
brother’s wife. This is Bharata’s commandment—the lord of earth, and we
have been satisfying his orders. Thou hast disregarded virtue. A wise
man, living in virtue, cannot let go one who hath passed by the
sanctions of morality. Bharata hath sanctioned the destruction of the
amorous; and we, O lord of monkeys, following his orders, though proper,
to encompass the destruction of one like thee who hath spoliated virtue
and morality. Like unto Lakshmana, I have contracted friendship with
Sugriva. And with a view to regain his wife and kingdom, he resolved to
engage in my well-being. I too also promised the same before the
monkeys. And how can a man of my position neglect to make good his
promise? For these causes of very great moment, favoured by virtue, I
have administered unto thee this condign punishment. Do thou now approve
it. Thy discomfiture is quite of a piece with the sanctions of morality—
and to assist friends is one of the codes of religion. Hear, Manu hath
composed a couple of couplets tending to the purification of character
and highly prized by the virtuous as well as myself. Those who,
perpetrating iniquity, bear with fortitude the punishment, inflicted by
their soverign get at the abode of the celestials being purified like
unto the pious. People are freed from their sins, when they confessing
their crimes, are either punished or forgiven. But the monarch who doth
not punish the perpetrator of an evil deed, is visited by a mighty sin.
Formerly an iniquity, like one perpetrated by thee, was committed by a
devotee who was punished severely by my forefather _Māndhāta_. And other
lords of earth punish in the same way the authors of misdeeds. What
more, the perpetrators of crime, themselves undergo penances and are
thus released from their sins. Therefore do not repent any more, O best
of monkeys. The punishment, I have inflicted on thee, is in consonance
with the sanctions of morality. We are not our own masters. Hearken, O
best of monkeys, there is another argument (for thy destruction); and
hearing which, O great hero, it behoveth thee to renounce thy ire. Many
persons living on flesh, either lying in ambush, or openly catch and
pierce by means of net, noose and trap, many a deer, terrified and
trusted, taking to their heels or quarrelling with their companions,
careful or careless. They are not to blame in this and I do not cherish,
O best of monkeys, any mortification or ire for this. And even many
royal ascetics, versed in religious lore, go a-hunting; and hence thou
hast been killed by me with a shaft, O monkey, in the conflict. And I am
justified in killing thee, whether thou dost fight or not since thou art
a monkey. There is no doubt, O best of monkeys, that the monarchs confer
life and piety auspicious and hard to attain. It doth not therefore
behove any one to injure them, to blame them and to use improper words
by them—since they are the celestials ranging on this earth under the
semblance of man. Not knowing virtue and growing angry why dost thou
blame me who am following the religion of my forefathers?" Being thus
accosted by Rāma, Vāli, greatly mortified and informed of the principle
of religion, observed no delinquency in Rāghava. Thereupon that lord of
monkeys spake unto Rāma, with folded hands, saying "There is not the
least doubt, O best of men, in all that thou hast said. An inferior
person can by no means address his superior improperly. It doth not
behove thee, O Rāghava, therefore to blame me for those unpleasant words
which I used towards thee, out of foolishness. Thou hast acquired a
practical mastery over the principles of religion and art ever engaged
in the welfare of thy subjects. Thy eternal power of ascertaining the
crime and meeting its condign punishment is perfectly clear. Do thou
know me as the foremost of sinners and one who hath deviated from the
track of morality. Do thou conduct me, with pious words, to a better
land." Vāli, having his throat choked with vapour, addressed again and
again, Rāma, with piteous accents, saying:—"I do not mourn so much for
me, Tārā, or other friends as for my son Angada, eldest and wearing a
golden _Angada._¹¹¹ Brought up by me from his very infancy, he shall by
my separation, wear away like unto a pond having its liquid contents
drunk up by an elephant. He is my only son, dear and born of Tārā. A
mere child and of unripe understanding as he is, that one of mighty
strength should always be protected by thee, O Rāma. Do thou regard
favourably Sugriva and Angada. Thou art their protector, and chastiser
punishing them for their sins. O king, O lord of men, it behoveth thee
to regard Sugriva and Angada in the same light in which thou regardest
Bharata and Lakshmana. It behoveth thee to so arrange as Sugriva may not
disregard that chaste Tārā who is blameable for my folly only. He, who
is favoured by thee, abideth by thy commandments and acteth after thy
heart, can acquire kingdom, attain to heaven, and govern the earth.
Desiring to have my destruction brought about by thee, I entered into
conflict with my brother Sugriva, albeit prevented by Tārā." Having
addressed Rāma thus, the lord of monkeys stopped. Thereupon Rāma
consoled Vāli, of clear understanding with the following moral words,
acceptable unto the Saints. "O best of monkeys, do thou not consider
ourselves as well as thyself blameable. We are more conversant, than
thou, with the principles of religion. They never lose their virtue
being proficient in the mode of ascerting crime and punishing it—one
administering punishment unto the criminal and the criminal receiving
it. And therefore receiving punishment (from me) thou hast been released
from thy sins and acquired a knowledge of religion. Do thou therefore
renounce thy grief, thy illusion and the fear that is lurking in thy
heart. It is impossible for thee, O foremost of monkeys, to withstand
the course of dispensation. There is not the least doubt, O lord of
monkeys, that Angada shall be brought up by me and Sugriva in the same
way as he was by thee." Hearing these sweet, collected and pious words
of the high-souled Rāma,—the represser of the enemies in a battle,—the
monkey again addressed him with the following pregnant words—"O lord, O
thou having Mahendra’s prowess, I do propitiate thee for my having
insulted thee with improper words, senseless as I was being wounded by
shafts. Do thou forgive me, O lord of monkeys."

  ¹¹¹ A bracelet worn on the upper arm.—T.




## SECTION XIX.


Being thus accosted with reasonable words, that lord, of monkeys, lying
on the ground and wounded with shafts, gave no reply. Having his limbs
dissevered by stones, being struck with trees and wounded by Rāma’s
shaft, he became sensetess at the approach of death. His spouse Tārā
heard that Vāli, the foremost of monkeys, had been killed in the
conflict by Rāma’s shaft. Hearing the heart-rending news of her
husband’s demise, she, big with a child, issued out of the mountain cave
with a troubled heart. And beholding Rāma with a bow in his hand, the
mighty monkeys, followers of Angada, fled away, terrified. Thereupon
Tārā observed those monkeys flying away terrified like unto deer
alienated from their herd, having lost their king. And the chaste lady,
racked with sorrow, spoke unto those monkeys, afraid of Rāma, wounded
with shafts and exercised with grief, saying:—"O monkeys, why are ye
dying away, terrified and distressed, leaving behind that foremost of
kings before whom ye were used to fight? Hath Vāli been killed by Rāma,
waiting at a distance with fleet and distant coursing shafts, being
requested by Sugriva for kingdom?" Hearing the words of that wife of the
monkey, they, wearing shapes at will, addressed that damsel with words,
worthy of being said on that occasion,—"O thou, having thy son alive, do
thou go back and bring up thy son Angada. Death himself, under Rāma’s
semblance, hath snatched away Vāli. He was killed by (Rāma’s) shafts,
resembling thunderbolts, as if clapped by thunder itself, having bored
trees and big stones (hurled by Vāli). That king of monkeys, having
Sakra’s prowess, being made away with, this host of monkeys have been
taking to their heels being overwhelmed with consternation. Let the
heroes defend the city and install Angada on the throne. And on his
being installed the monkeys shall serve Vāli’s son. O thou having a fine
countenance, the monkeys shall enter this stronghold, although it is a
favourite place with thee. Herein dwell many forest-rangers, wifeless
and having wives. And we are really afraid of them, avaricious, and
formerly deprived of their wealth by us." Hearing those words of the
monkeys, lying at a little distance, that lady, smiling sweet, spoke
unto them, words worthy of herself—"That great lord of monkeys, my
husband, being dead, what shall I do with my son, my kingdom and myself?
I shall place myself at the feet of that high-souled one, who hath been
killed by Rāma’s shaft." Having said this, (Tārā) proceeded, overwhelmed
with grief, weeping and striking her bead with her hands. While
proceeding, she espied her husband lying on the ground like unto the
destroyer of the lords of monkeys who have never been discomfitted in a
battle field, hurling mountains like unto Vāsava hurling thunderbolts;
emitting a roar like unto a big cloud assisted by a mighty wind;
resembling Sakra in prowess and like unto a cloud accompanied by rain;
the represser of repressers; a mighty hero discomfitted by an equally
powerful one; like unto a lion killed by a tiger for flesh; worshipped
of all mem; like unto a _chaitya,_¹¹² adorned with pennons and altars,
scattered and broken by Garuda with a view to kill serpents. And she
espied Rāma reclining his person on a mighty bow, his younger brother
and her husband’s younger brother. Passing them by and getting at her
husband and beholding him killed in battle, she, losing her senses fell
down to the ground. And thereupon rising again like one asleep, she,
beholding her husband engarlanded by death, cried aloud, exclaiming "O
son of worshipful sire." And beholding Tārā like unto a she-elephant and
Angada, bewailing in this wise, Sugriva attained to an excess of grief.

  ¹¹² A pile of stones.—T.




## SECTION XX.


Beholding her husband lying dead on the ground with the life-destroying
shafts of Rāma, Tārā, having a moon-like countenance, approaching,
embraced him. And seeing him slain with shafts like unto an elephant,
resembling a lord of mountains and an uprooted tree, Tārā, racked with
grief began to bewail—"O hero, O foremost of monkeys, O powerful one, O
thou terrible in warfare, why dost thou not welcome me to-day who am
guilty of some iniquity by thee? Rise, O best of monkeys, and lie down
on a better bed; monarchs do not stretch themselves on earth. O lord of
earth, indeed earth is thy favourite wife; since renouncing me, thou,
though dead, art serving her with thy body. Evident it is, O hero, that
while engaged in a lawful conflict, thou hadst created another city of
Kishkindhā,in the region of the celestials. All thy enjoyments with me
in nectar-smelling woods, have been brought to a close. Thou, the lord
of monkey-herds, being slain, I am deprived of joy and hope and am sunk
in the abyss of grief. Forsooth, my heart is uncommon hard, since
beholding thee on the ground it hath not been sundered into thousand
pieces being overwhelmed with grief. Sugriva’s wife was carried away and
banished by thee and this is the result of thy action, O foremost of
monkeys. O lord of monkeys, out of thy ignorance thou didst neglect all
my well meaning words which I said, being intent on thy welfare and
benefit. O worshipful one, thou shalt captivate today, the hearts of the
dexterous Apsarās, proud of their youth and beauty. Forsooth, thou hast
been by force brought under the control of _Kāla_, since thou hast been
discomfitted by Sugriva, albeit thou art above the control of others.
Destroying Vāli unseasonably, while engaged in conflict with another
person, and perpetrating such an iniquitous deed, Kākuthstha doth never
relent. Unused to miseries before how shall I, being an object
commiseration, put up like one helpless, with my widow-hood and grief.
How shall the heroic and youthful Angada, brought up in luxury and
happiness, be regarded by his uncle, senseless with wrath? Do thou cast
for good, O my son, thy looks towards thy pious sire, for since now it
will be hard for thee to see him again. Do thou console thy son, favour
me with orders, smell his head, as thou art going to journey in a
foreign land. By destroying thee, Rāma,hath performed a great action,
since by this he hath been released from his vow unto Sugriva. O
Sugriva, do thou gain thy ends and get back thy Rumā; devoid of anxiety
do thou govern thy kingdom—thy enemy, thy brother hath been slain. O
lord of monkeys, why dost thou not welcome me, thy beloved spouse, who
am bewailing thus? Behold, thy other wives are also mourning in the same
wise." Hearing the bewailings of that she-monkey, others, taking Angada,
distressed and overwhelmed with grief, began to cry piteously.—"O hero,
having _Angada_ on thy arms, why art thou proceeding on a journey for
good in a foreign land leaving behind (thy son) Angada. It doth not
behove thee (to leave aside) thy dear son, gifted with diverse
accomplishments and wearing a charming and beautiful cloth. O thou of
long arms, O lord of monkeys, if I have offended thee in any way, do
thou forgive me, after ascertaining my crime. O hero, I touch thy feet
with my head." Bewailing thus piteously with other she-monkeys, Tārā,
having a blameless countenance, stationing herself where Vāli was,
resolved to put an end to her being by fastings.




## SECTION XXI.


Thereupon beholding Tārā fallen (on the ground) like unto a star dropt
down from the sky, Hanumān, the lord of monkey-herds, consoled her again
and again.—"Animals, unagitated, attain to happiness or misery, as an
outcome of their actions performed (in their previous existence) by
merits or demerits. Why dost thou mourn for others, thyself being an
object of moruning? Why dost thou feel commisseration for the poor,
thyself being poorly? In this body like unto a babble who is there who
mourneth for another? It behoveth thee now, O thou having thy son alive,
to look after prince Angada and think of those duties which remain to be
executed by thee (after the demise of Vāli). Do thou know that life and
death of the animals is very unsettled. It is therefore proper to
perform what tends to the welfare of afterlife. It doth not behove thee,
O learned damsel, to mourn like others. He even, who (while living) was
surrounded by thousands of monkeys cherishing hopes, hath met his
destined end. This hero discharged his royal duties in consonance with
the sanctions of morality and was gifted with various kingly
accomplishments such as conciliation, charity and forgiveness. He hath
attained to the land of kings and it becometh thee not to mourn for him.
O blameless damsel, all these foremost of monkeys, this thy son Angada,
this kingdom of the monkey chief, do belong to thee. Do thou soon
despatch, O passionate lady, these two (Angada and Sugriva) exercised
with grief as they are (for the performance of Vāli’s funeral rites).
And abiding by thy commandments let Angada govern the earth. Let Angada
perform all those ceremonies, which should be gone through by sons
according to the _Sastras_ and which are for the well-being of the king;
this is the time for the performances of those funeral rites. Performing
the funeral ceremonies of the lord of monkeys do thou install Angada.
And beholding thy son thus established on the throne thou shalt be able
to pacify thy grief?" Hearing those words of Hanumān, Tārā, racked with
grief consequent upon the loss of her lord, bespake him who was standing
there:—"I would rather die with this hero who hath been slain than have
a hundred sons like Angada. I cannot myself govern this kingdom nor can
I confer it upon Angada. Such duty devolves upon his (Angada’s) uncle
Sugriva now. O Hanumān, do thou not consider that I shall confer this
kingdom upon Angada—O best of monkeys, father is son’s friend (in this
respect) not mother. There is no other resource for me tending to my
welfare both in this world and the next than taking refuge onto this
lord of monkeys. It is becoming for me to serve this bed which hath been
resorted to by the hero, slain (and lying before me.)




## SECTION XXII.


Vāli, ranging on the verge of death, casting his looks around and
sighing faintly, espied his younger brother Sugriva before him.
Welcoming that lord of monkeys with clear accents, Vāli addressed him
affectionately saying:—"O Sugriva, do thou not take to thy heart the
improper conduct I have shown towards thee, being attracted by
inevitable foolishness, subject as I was to sin. Methinks, O brother, it
is not our fortune to enjoy at the same time the double bliss of
fraternal affection and the enjoyment of kingdom, or else why has it
happened otherwise? Do thou acquire to-day this kingdom of the
forest-ranges and know me as one who hath departed to the abode of
Death. Soon shall I renounce my life, kingdom, my exquisite grace and my
blameless fame. It behoveth thee, O hero, O king, to perform what I
shall speak unto thee in this plight, however difficult it might be. Do
thou behold Angada fallen on the ground with tears in his eyes—a little
boy, incapable, brought up in luxury and deserving happiness. Do thou
maintain this my son, dearer than my life, like unto thy own son, born
of thy loins, satisfying all his wants in my absence. O best of monkeys,
like unto me, thou art his father, protector, conferrer of gifts and
remover of fear. This graceful son of Tārā equals thee in prowess and
shall precede thee in the destruction of Rākshasas. This youthful
Angada, Tārā’s son, gifted with energy and strength, shall perform
befitting exploits displaying his prowess in the battle. Surasen’s
daughter is wonderfully expert in ascertaining subtle things and giving
counsels in the time of danger. Do thou, without the least doubt perform
what shall the chaste lady instruct thee to do; for Tārā’s advice never
goes without effect. It behoveth thee to perform Rāghava’s service
fearlessly or else thou shalt be visited with sin: on his being insulted
thou shalt be injured. O Sugriva, do thou put on this celestial golden
garland—herein dwelleth the bounteous Sree who shall renounce me after
my death." Having been accosted thus by Vāli, out of fraternal
affection, Sugriva renouncing joy again became pale like unto the Moon
possessed by Rāhu. Renouncing his inimical feelings, being thus
addressed by Vāli and carrying out his words energetically Sugriva
accepted the golden garland as ordered (by him). And conferring (upon
Sugriva) that golden garland and beholding his son before him, Vāli,
resolved upon death, spake unto Angada, saying:—"Do thou place thyself
now under the control of Sugriva, ascertaining time and place, putting
up with misery for thy welfare and injury. O thou having long arms,
Sugriva shall not regard thee much, if dost thou remain in the same wise
in which thou hadst been brought up by me before.¹¹³ O slayer of foes,
do thou never mix with Sugriva’s enemies, and place thyself always under
Sugriva’s control, having subdued thy senses and being intent upon thy
master’s (Sugriva’s) welfare. Do thou not cultivate too much of
friendship nor be wanting in it—for both of these extremes are sources
of disasters. Do thou therefore follow the golden mean." After he had
said this, his eyes became expanded, his teeth were opened and his
appearance became ghastly. And greatly pained by shafts he breathed his
last. And thereupon, the monkeys, the foremost of those who go jumping,
having lost their chief, bewailed and cried. On that monkey chiefs
departure to the land of celestials, Kishkindhā was divested of her
lord, and gardens, hills and woods were all rendered lonely. That best
of monkeys, who fought a dreadful battle with the high-souled
_Gandharbas_, being dead, all other monkeys became of pale countenance.
"Vāli entered into a terrible conflict with the mighty-armed Golava and
fought for ten years and five, for nights and days without respite. And
on the sixteenth year, Golava was killed. Bringing about the destruction
of that wicked _Gandharba_, Vāli, having terrible teeth, saved us all
from fear. How hath he been killed to-day?" Like unto kine, incapable of
enjoying peace in a mighty forest filled with lions, their chief being
dead, these forest-rangers could not attain to felicity on the demise of
that lord of monkeys. Thereupon, Tārā, sunk in the gulf of disaster,
eying the countenance of her deceased lord, fell down to the ground
embracing Vāli like unto a creeper clinging for its support to a mighty
but broken tree.

  ¹¹³ The significance of the passage is as follows:—Thou wert a mere
      child while I brought thee up. But now thou art a grown up young
      man and this is the time for thee to serve thy elders. Do thou
      therefore serve Sugriva.—T.




## SECTION XXIII.


Thereupon smelling the face of that lord of monkeys, Tārā again
addressed her deceased lord, known all over the world, saying:—"O hero,
disregarding my words, thou art lying on the uneven earth, hard and
filled with gravels. O lord of monkeys, the earth is dearer unto thee
than I, since thou art lying there embracing her and art not welcoming
me. O hero, O dear, O brave lord, wonder it is that God under the
semblance of Rāma, hath placed himself under the control of Sugriva;
hithertofore he shall be regarded as a hero. Why art thou not awake,
hearing the bewailings of bears and monkeys who used to wait upon thee,
powerful, as well as that of Angada and myself? Alas! thou art lying on
this bed of the heroes, being slain in the battle, where formerly, thy
enemies destroyed by thee, used to lie down. thou born of a pure family,
O thou that art fond of warfare, O my dear, O conferror of honors,
whither hast thou departed making me husbandless? Let not the wise,
henceforth, confer their daughters upon the heroes. Alas! behold me, the
wife of a hero, made a widow in no time. Shattered is my honor and
destroyed is my happiness and I am sunk in the deep abyss of grief.
Forsooth, this my firm heart is not sundered into hundred pieces,
beholding my husband slain! Thou art my friend, my dear husband and a
great hero—and thou hast met with destruction, being struck by another
man. A husbandless woman is always styled by the wise as widow, although
she might have a son and enough of riches. O hero, thou art lying down
in a pool of blood issuing out of thy own person, like unto thy own bed
having a red-dyed bed-sheet. Thy body is on all sides besmeared with
blood and dust and I am incapable of embracing thee with my arms, O best
of monkeys. Surely hath Sugriva satisfied his hostile intention to-day,
whose fear hath been removed by one shaft, discharged by Rāma. Thyself
departing to the land of the dead, I have been eying thee simply, being
prevented from touching thy person by the shaft piercing thy heart".¹¹⁴
Thereupon Neela took out that shaft from the person of (Vāli) like unto
a flaming serpent lurking in a mountain cave. There beamed the shaft
extracted from his body like unto the rays of the Sun, stationed on the
summit of the setting hill. And there poured forth from all his wounds,
streams of blood, like unto showers of melted copper and other metals
falling from a mountain. And (Tārā) washed, with tears, her heroic
husband’s body covered with dust and wounded with weapons. Beholding her
husband thus slain and besmeared with blood, she spake unto her son,
Angada, having coppery eyes,saying:—"Behold this terrible declining
stage of thy Sire. Here is the end of his hostilities collected by his
impious actions. O my son, do thou bow unto thy kingly father, the
conferrer of honors, who hath departed to the abode of Death, having a
flaming person like unto the rising Sun." Thus accosted, Angada rose up
and, saying, "I (do touch my Sire’s feet)," embraced his father’s feet
with his plump arms. (Thereupon Tārā said)—"Saying ’Do thou live long’
why dost thou not welcome Angada, to-day as before, who hath bowed unto
thee? I am with my son, standing by thee who art dead, like unto a cow
with her calf, having the bull slain by a lion. How hast thou, without
me, thy wife, bathed in the water of Rāma’s shafts, at the end of thy
battle-like sacrifice? Why do I not behold here that favourite golden
garland of thine, which was conferred on thee by the lord of celestials,
pleased in a battle? Royal grace hath not renounced thee, O conferrer of
honors, albeit thou art dead, like unto the rays not quitting the king
of mountains, even after the Sun is set. Thou didst not act by my
wholesome words, nor could I prevent thee. And I am now destroyed with
my son, along with thee in the battle. Truly hath Sree (goddess of
wealth) renounced me."

  ¹¹⁴ The meaning is:—Lest by my touching that shaft thou feelest a
      greater pain.—T.




## SECTION XXIV.


Beholding Tārā emerged in a deep and mighty ocean of grief, Vāli’s
younger brother was overwhelmed with penitence, in consequence of the
unbecoming destruction of his brother. And seeing her countenance full
of tears, the high-souled (Sugriva), racked with grief and repentance,
approached slowly Rāma along with his followers. And nearing him, with a
bow in his hand, having arrows like unto serpents, famed and having
auspicious marks on his person, he spake unto Rāghava, seated there,
saying—"O lord of men, thou hast fulfilled thy promise by carrying it
out into practice; and as for wretched me, O son of a king, I shall
refrain today from all enjoyments. This queen lamenting piteously, these
subjects and retinue bewailing, being overwhelmed with grief, this king
being slain, how can kingdom please me? O Rāma out of anger, and
passion, and on account of my being insulted by him, I did formerly
desire to bring about my brother’s destruction. But that lord of
monkey-herds being slain, best of Ikshwākus, I am truly pierced to the
quick with anguish. I do prefer living for good in the mount Rishyamuka,
earning my livelihood somehow or other, to the accession of heaven by
destroying (Vāli). This highly intellectual and high-souled one spake
unto me "Do thou range at large, I do not wish to destroy thee." Such
words were really becoming of him, O Rāma. And these words and this
action become me (vile as I am). How can a brother, O Rāma, however
avaricious he night be, relish the destruction of his qualified brother,
comparing the happiness of a kingdom, with the grief (consequent upon
his brother’s demise)? He did not desire to slay me, lest his greatness
might be spoiled; but alas! through my wicked sense, I performed an
iniquity by taking the life of my brother. Being struck by him with
branches of trees, while I fled away and wept, he, consoling me, said
only "Do not do this again. " He all along maintained his fraternal
feelings, his honesty and piety; but (woe to me) I have displayed my
wrath, passion and monkey-hood. O friend, like unto the lord of
celestials perpetrating sin by destroying Biswarupa, I have been, by
bringing about the destruction of my brother, visited with this sin,
beyond comprehension, avoidable, undesirable and invisible. Indra’s sin
was shared by earth; water, trees and women; but who is there who will
bear and desire to participate this monkey’s sin? Perpetrating such an
improper and irreligious act, tending to the decay of my family, I do
not deserve the respect of my subjects and the heir-apparentship; what
of kingdom, O Rāghava. I am the perpetrator of a vile and disgraceful
sin, blamed of all in this world. And like unto a current of rain going
downwards, this mighty grief hath overcome me. This mighty and
infuriated elephant of a sin, having the destruction of a brother as its
body, repentence, as its trunk, head, eyes and tusks, hath been crushing
me like unto the banks of a river. Alas! O best of kings, this
unbearable sin hath been driving away all pious feelings from my heart
like unto alloy leaking out of discolored gold when molten in fire, O
Rāghava. Methinks, for me, O Rāghava, these mighty monkeys and Angada
are almost half-dead (with grief). A good-natured and obedient son is
rare. Where is to be found Angada’s equal? O hero, there is no such land
where I may meet again my brother. The heroic Angada shall not live
to-day—and if he lives, his mother shall live to bring him up. Forsooth,
without her son, she shall not live long. Therefore shall I enter this
flaming fire with a view to place myself on the same level with my
brother and his son and all these mighty monkeys shall engage in quest
of Sitā, abiding by thy commandments. O son of a king, they shall all
carry out thy orders even in my absence, do thou,therefore, order me (to
enter fire) who am the destroyer of my own race, have performed an
inquity and do not deserve living any more." Hearing the words of Vāli’s
younger brother, who was bewailing thus, Rāma, the heroic descendant of
Rāghu and the slayer of foes, remained stupified for some time with
tears in his eyes. In the mean-time, Rāma, patient like unto the
protector of the world, worked with curiosity, looked again and again
towards the bewailing Tārā sunk in the gulf of disaster. Thereupon the
principal counsellors raised up the brave spouse of the lord of monkeys,
having graceful eyes and lying ou the earth, embracing her husband. And
snatched away from her husband and trembling, she beheld Rāma, with bow
and arrows in his hand, burning like unto the Sun by virtue of his own
effulgence. And beholding him gifted with all royal marks, having
beautiful eyes and never seen before, that one, having the eyes of a
fawn, thought within herself. "This great one must be Kākuthstha." And
the worshipful Tārā, worked with grief, and overwhelmed with disasters,
bewailing, neared quickly that high-souled one, resembling the lord of
celestials and hard to approach. And having reached the pure-souled
Rāma, who had his ends fully attained in battle, the high-minded Tārā,
having her frame worked with grief, spake unto him, saying:—"Thou art
immeasurable, hard to approach, highly pious, prudent, of controlled
senses and increasing fame, forgiving like unto earth and of blood-red
eyes. Thou hast bow and arrows in hand, art highly powerful and of a
tough body. And renouncing human grace that hast assumed the grace of a
celestial person. Do thou slay me with that self-same shaft with which
my dear one was slain. And thus slain, O hero, I shall be near him, for
Vālii doth not relish the company of any other woman but me. O thou
having eyes resembling clean lotus-petals, this (hero) departing to the
abode of celestials and not beholding me there, shall not delight in the
company of _Apsarās_, wearing diversified garments and copper-colored
corronets. Even in the land of celestials, O hero, Vāli shall turn pale
with grief in my separation, like unto thee in the picuresque dale of
the Lord of mountains, separated from the daughter of the king of
Videha. Thou knowest well that a handsome man is greatly afflicted with
the separation of his spouse; and knowing this, do thou slay me, and
Vāli shall not be tormented with grief consequent upon my absence.
High-souled as thou art, thou art thinking that thou shalt, slaying me,
be visited with a sin arising from the destruction of a female. But do
thou kill me, O son of a king, knowing me as the soul of Vāli, and thou
shalt not be responsible for destroying a woman. According to the Vedas
and various other sacred texts, wives are inseparably blended with their
husbands. And the wise say that there is no other gift better than that
of a wife in this world. Thou shalt, O hero, confer me religiously upon
my dear one and by this gift thou shalt be saved from the sin consequent
upon killing me. It doth not behove thee not to kill me, who am
exercised with grief, without my lord, snatched away from him and
reduced to such a (pitiable) plight. O lord of men, I cannot live long
without that highly intelligent lord of monkeys, having an elephantine
gait and wearing an excellent golden garland." Thus accosted, the
high-souled lord consoling Tārā, spake unto her the following
well-meaning words.—"Do thou not lose thyself, O wife of a hero. This
whole world of creation is being guided by God’s dispensation. And by
Him is administered misery or happiness as people say. These three
worlds cannot neglect His dispensations and are entirely subject to Him.
Thy son shall attain to the heir apparentship of the throne and thou
shalt enjoy excellent joy therefrom. This hath been decreed by the
Almighty. Wives of heroes do never relent." Being thus consoled by the
high-souled (Rāma) gifted with prowess, and the slayer of foes, Tārā,
the wife of a heroic husband, and wearing a graceful garment, ceased
bewailing.




## SECTION XXV.


Thereupon, Kākutstha, with Lakshmana, equally aggrieved, said, consoling
Sugriva, and Tārā together with Angada.—"Grief and lamentations do not
tend to the welfare of the deceased. It therefore behoveth ye to perform
the after ceremonies. Ye have satisfied the worldly practice with a
profuse discharge of tears. It is not proper to delay the performance of
appointed actions. Time is the prime cause in this world, and the source
of the accomplishment of actions. And Time it is that leads men to
actions. No one is the lord of another person, and no one leads him to
actions. People are subject to their actions of previous existence and
Time aids them. Even the Eternal being cannot withstand the ways of
Time. He never decayeth and no one else can withstand the course of
Time. It hath no friend, no cause and no one can overcome it. It hath no
kinsman, no relation; even it is not subject to itself. The wise can
percieve the work of Time. Piety, wealth and desire are all subject to
it. Vāli, the lord of monkeys, hath attained to his own true state,
reaping the fruits of his actions, acquired by virtue of his royal
accomplishments —namely, forgiveness and charity. The abode of the
celestials, which was conquered by this high-souled one by his former
piety, hath now been occupied by him after resigning his body. This is
the best course of Time that hath been attained to by the lord of
monkey-herds. No more with lamentations therefore; do thou perform the
actions that are worthy of being performed on this occasion." After Rāma
had spoken thus, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes, addressed Sugriva,
senseless with grief, with the following sound words:—"Sugrivā, do thou
perform the funeral ceremonies of Vāli along with Tārā and Angada. Do
thou collect for cremation many a dry fuel and celestial sandal. Do thou
console the unfortunate Angada, who is beside himself with grief. Do not
conduct thyself like an ignorant person, for this city is now under
thee. Let Angada bring clothes, garlands, scents, clarified butter, oil
and other necessary articles. O Tārā, do thou go and bring soon a
conveyance; for speediness is a special virtue on an occasion like this.
Let the monkeys dress themselves who can convey this hearse. The
powerful and the capable only shall carry Vāli". Having thus addressed
Sugriva, Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra’s joy and the destroyer of
foes, stood before his elder brother. And hearing the words of
Lakshmana, the counsellor respectfully entered the cave with a view to
bring the conveyance. And taking that conveyance carried by the monkeys
and worthy of being carried by the heroes, he issued out again of the
cave. It had a celestial throne and was like unto a war-chariot and had
trees and birds painted on it. It was painted on all sides with the
figures of foot soldiers, had latticed windows and was like unto the car
of the _Siddhas_—spacious and artistically and stoutly built by artizans
with beautiful carvings like unto a wooden hill. It was ornamented with
excellent ornaments and beautiful garlands, sprinkled with red sandal
and skirted with strong ribs. It was covered with flowers and
lotus-garlands, crusted with precious clothes and had the colour of the
rising Sun. Beholding such a conveyance, Rāma spake unto Lakshmana,
saying—"Do thou soon conduct the funeral service of Vāli." Thereupon
Sugriva, along with Angada, placing Vāli on the conveyance, began to
bewail.

And placing the lifeless body of Vāli on it, he covered it with various
ornaments, garlands, and clothes. Thereat Sugrira, the king of monkeys,
ordered for the performance of Vāli’s funeral rites. "Let the monkeys go
before, scattering many a precious jewel and let the conveyance follow
them. Let the monkeys perform the obsequies of our master with such
grandeur as befits the riches of the kings on this earth." With a view
to perform the funeral ceremonies of Vāli, the . counsellors and other
monkeys, having lost their king and embraced Angada, proceeded weeping.
And other subject monkeys followed them. And all other she-monkeys,
headed by Tārā, having lost their lord, bewailed, exclaiming again and
again—"O hero, O hero".—And they, thus bewailing piteously, followed
their lord. And in response to the bewailings of she-monkeys, hills and
forests, as if, bewailed on all sides. Monkeys, ranging in the forest,
made funeral piles on the banks of the hill-streams and in solitary
watery nooks. Thereupon laying down from their shoulders the conveyance,
those foremost of monkeys stationed themselves in a corner, being
stricken with grief. And Tārā, beholding her husband’s body on the
conveyance, placed his head on her lap and bewailed, overwhelmed with
grief. "O lord of monkeys! O my lord! O my dear one! O thou used to
luxuries! O thou having long arms! O my darling! behold me. Why dost
thou not behold these monkeys, racked with sorrow? O conferrer of
honors, thy countenance looks as if beaming with joy; although thou art
dead, and thou appearest as if alive, having the hue of the setting Sun.
O monkey, Death himself, under the semblance of Rāma, is attracting
thee, who with one shaft in the battle, hath rendered us all widows. O
best of kings, these she-monkeys cannot go by jumping. Dost thou not
percive that they have travelled so far on foot? Those thy wives, having
moon-like countenances, have always thy welfare in view. Why dost thou
not, O best of monkeys, cast thy looks towards them and Sugriva? O king,
these thy counsellors, thy wives headed by Tārā, and all these citizens
are bewailing around thee. O slayer of foes, do thou despatch thy
counsellors to the city and we shall all enjoy in this forest, excited
with _amour_." The other she-monkeys, worked with sorrow, raised up Tārā
bewailing thus being exercised with grief consequent upon the demise of
her husband. Thereupon Angada along with Sugriva, overwhelmed with
grief, weeping, placed his Sire’s body on the funeral pile. And putting
fire duly, he circumambulated his Sire, bound for a journey for good.
Having duly cremated Vāli’s body,the foremost of monkeys arrived at a
river of auspicious water with a view to perform the watery ceremony.
And all these monkeys along with Sugriva and Tārā, placing Angada before
them, sprinkled water. And the highly powerful Kākuthsha, equally
aggrieved like Sugriva, being as poorly, cronducted duly the obsequious
ceremonies of Vāli. Thereupon cremating Vāli, gifted with unequalled
prowess, slain with one shaft of the foremost of Ikswakus, and like unto
flaming fire, Sugriva appeared before Rāma who was in the company of
Lakshmana.




## SECTION XXVI.


And thereupon those foremost of monkeys waited there, surrounding
Sugriva exercised with grief and wearing wetted cloth. And they all,
approaching the mighty-armed Rāma of unwearied actions, stationed
themselves with folded hands like unto the great ascetics around the
Grand-Father (of the celestials). Thereupon Hanumān, the son of Marut,
resembling a golden hill and having a countenance resembling the rising
Sun, spake with folded hands, saying:—"By thy assistance, O Kākuthstha,
O lord, this great ancestral kingdom of the highly powerful monkeys,
having sharpened teeth, incapable of being acquired by the high-souled
ones, hath been attained to (by Sugriva). Being commanded by thee, he
along with his friends, entering this city, shall perform the royal
duties. And being duly bathed he shall worship thee particularly, with
garlands, jewels, scents and _oshadhis_. It behoveth thee to enter this
pleasant mountain cave and satisfy these monkeys by installing (Sugriva
on the throne)." Being thus accosted by Hanumān, the highly intelligent
Rāghava, skilled in speech and the slayer of foes, replied:— "O gentle
Hanumān, abiding by my Sire’s mandate, I shall not enter a hamlet or a
city for these fourteen years. Let Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys,
enter this magnificent celestial cave and do ye all instal him speedily
on the throne." Having thus addressed Hanumān, Rāma spake unto Sugriva,
saying:—"Conversant with customs as thou art, do thou instal this
generous and heroic Angada, gifted with prowess and honoring customs, as
the heir-apparent of the throne. This brave and eldest son of thy elder
brother— Angada, is truly worthy of the heir-apparentship. O gentle one,
this month of _Srābana_, which is the first of those four months which
make up the rainy season, hath set in and this is not the time therefore
to institute any enquiry about Sitā. Do thou therefore enter thy
auspicious city and I shall live in this mountain along with Lakshmana.
Pleasant indeed is this mountain cave, spacious, filled with air, water
and many lotuses. Thou shalt engage in endeavours to bring about the
destruction of Rāvana, after _Kartika_ sets in. This is not the proper
time, O gentle one, and do thou enter thy own city. And being installed
on the throne do thou enhance the joy of thy friends." Being thus
commanded by Rāma, Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys entered the pleasant
city of Kishkindhā, reared by Vāli. Encircling that lord of monkeys
thousands of them entered the city. Beholding the lord of monkeys, the
subjects bowed unto him, lowering their heads on the ground. Welcoming
the subjects and raising them up, the highly powerful Sugriva entered
the pleasant inner apartment of his brother. On his entering the city,
his friends installed the highly powerful foremost of monkeys—Sugriva,
on the throne like unto the celestials placing the thousand-eyed Deity
(on the kingdom). The monkeys brought for him a copper-colored golden
umbrella, white chowries, a magnificent golden staff, diverse jewels,
various seeds and medicating drugs, roots and flowers of glomerous fig
trees, white clothes, white sandal paste, fragrant garlands, flowers
growing in water and on land, celestial sandal and various scents, fried
grain, gold, _Priyangu_ honey,¹¹⁵ clarified butter, curd, tiger-skin, a
pair of excellent sandals, _gorochana_¹¹⁶ and red _Arsenic._ Carrying
all those things there came sixteen maids, highly delighted. Thereupon
those monkeys pleased the foremost of twice-born ones with jewels
clothes and eatables, with a view to instal that best of monkeys. And
these conversant with _mantras_ threw clarified butter, sanctified by
_mantras_, into flaming fire burning on a _Kuça_ bed. And placing him on
an excellent throne facing the east, uttering duly _mantras_ in that
golden room situated on the summit of the picturesque palace and
beautified with magnificent coverlets and garlands, and collecting pure
water from various rivers, sacred places and oceans, those foremost of
monkeys kept it in golden jars. Gaya, Gabaksha, Gabaya, Sarava,
Gandhamadana, Main da, Divida, Hanumān and Jambuban, installed Sugriva
with auspicious horns of a bull and golden jars according to the rites
prescribed by _Sastras_ and sanctioned by the great saints like unto the
celestials installing the thousand eyed Deity with pure, fragrant water.
Sugriva being installed thus, these high-souled and foremost of monkeys,
by hundreds and thousands, began to clatter with delight. Abiding by
Rāma’s words, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, embracing Angada, conferred
on him the heir-apparentship of the throne. And Angada being thus
installed, those best of monkeys, highly delighted, adored the
high-souled Sugriva, extolling him again and again. Angada and Sugriva
being thus established, they all, greatly delighted, praised again and
again the high-souled Rāma and Lakshmana. And the city of Kishkindhā,
filled with stoutly built people and adorned with pennons and flags,
appeared beautiful in the mountain cave. Communicating unto the
high-souled Rāma the news of installation, the highly powerful lord of
monkey hosts (Sugriva) getting back his wife Rumā, regained the kingdom
like unto the lord of celestials.

  ¹¹⁵ A medicinal plant, and perfume, commonly known by the name
      _Priyangu_ and described in some places as a fragrant seed.—T.

  ¹¹⁶ A bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine of a cow, or
      committed in the shape of scibulae by the animal, or according to
      some found in the head of a cow.—T.




## SECTION XXVII.


On Sugriva being installed and the monkeys entering the cave, Rāma,
along with his younger brother, got at the Prasrabana hill, resounded
with the noise of tigers and deer, filled with terrible lions, covered
with diverse trees, creepers and bowers, inhabited by bears, monkeys,
_Gopuchyas_ and cats, resembling a collection of clouds and always
auspicious. Rāma, along with Saumitri, selected for his habitation, a
spacious cave, situated on the summit of that hill. Making the above
condition with Sugriva, Rāma, the pure-souled descendant of Raghu, spake
unto his humble younger brother Lakshmana, the enhancer of wealth, the
following sound words, worthy of being spoken on that occasion—"O
Saumitri, O slayer of foes, in this pleasant and spacious mountain cave
filled with air, we shall pass the rainy season. O son of a king, this
summit of the hill is excellent and picturesque, beautified with white,
black and coppery stones, filled with diverse metals and river frogs,
covered with diverse trees and pleasant creepers, resounded with the
musical notes of various birds and cries of peacocks and beautified with
various flowery trees,such as _Malati_, _Kundas_, _Sindubara_,¹¹⁷
_Sirisa_,¹¹⁸ _Kadamba_, _Arjuna,_¹¹⁹ and _Sarja_.¹²⁰ O son of a king,
this pond filled with full blown lotuses shall always be near our cave.
This cave shall be worthy of our habitation, O gentle one, having its
north-eastern part low and the western part high. There is, O Saumitri,
at the entrance of the cave, a level, beautiful, spacious stone, black
like unto collyrium. Behold O my brother, on the north, the summit of
the hill, resembling collyrium and a rising cloud. There appears on the
south a beautiful white hill resembling the Kailaça filled with various
metals. Behold before the cave the mudless stream, flowing towards the
east like unto _Janhavi_¹²¹ in the _Trikuta_¹²² mountain. This rivulet
appears like unto a damsel ornamented and clothed, being filled with
various trees, such as—_Sandal_, _Tilaka_, _Sāla_, _Tamalas_,
_Atimuktas_,¹²³ _Padmaka_, _Saralas_,¹²⁴ _Asokas_, _Bāneeras,_¹²⁵
_Timidas_, _Vakulas_, _Ketakas,_ _Hintalas_, _Tinicas_, _Neepas_,
_Vetashas_, _Kritamalakas_ growing on her banks. This rivulet resounded
with various notes of hundreds of various birds, filled with
_Chakrabakas_ attached to each other, crowded with geese and _Sarasas_,
having picturesque banks, and various jewels, is as it were laughing on
all sides. Here it appears covered with violet lotuses, here with red
lotuses and there again with celestial white water-lilies. This pleasant
and picturesque stream is filled with various water fowls and
_Chakravakas_ and served by many a saint. Behold there the rows of
pleasant sandal trees and those _Kukuvas_ which have grown up as it were
like unto mental emotion. Picturesque indeed is this place, O slayer of
foes, and we shall happily live here, O son of Sumitrā. At no distance,
O son of a king, from this place is situate the pleasant city of
Sugriva—Kishkindhā, filled with forests. Hear then, O best of
conquerors, the sound of music, and the clatter of monkeys mingled with
the sound of _Mridangas_. Forsooth is rejoicing Sugriva—the foremost of
monkeys, getting back his wife, regaining his kingdom, and attaining to
regal splendour." Having said this, Rāghava, along with Lakshmana, dwelt
in that _Prasravana_ hill abounding in caves and bowers. He did not
attain to a best felicity although he lived in that pleasant hill filled
with many things. Pondering over the ravishment of his spouse, dearer
than his life, beholding the setting of the Sun in particular, he did
not go to sleep, although he laid himself on the bed in the night. His
younger brother Lakshmana, equally aggrieved, spoke unto Kākutstha, thus
bewailing being exercised with grief and almost beside himself with
sorrow, consequent upon Sitā’s bereavement, saying:—"It doth not behove
thee to lament thus, being exercised with grief—it is not unknown unto
thee that people, thus bewailing do exhaust themselves by and by. O
Rāghava, thou art devoted to pious actions and the services of the Deity
in this world— and pious, energetic and dost believe in the existence of
God. Without being persevering thou shalt not be able to destroy in
conflict thy enemy—that terrible, willy Rākshasa. Do thou renounce thy
grief and take recourse to energy and thou shalt be able to slay that
Rākshasa with all his family. What of the destruction of Rāvana, thou
art O Kākutstha, capable of uprooting the earth with oceans, forests and
hills. Rains have set in and do thou wait for the autumn when thou shalt
encompass the destruction of Rāvana with his kingdom and kinsmen. I,
too, am exciting thy latent energy like unto fire hidden in ashes with
oblations. Welcoming the auspicious and well-meaning accents of
Lakshmana, Rāghava again spake unto him the following affectionate
words:— "O Lakshmana, truly do thy words become thee, affectionate,
devoted, truthful and intent on my welfare as thou art. Renouncing this
grief standing in the way of all business, I shall call forth, the more,
this my energy on the occasion of displaying my prowess. I shall live
here, awaiting the autumn and abiding by thy words and awaiting as well
Sugriva’s pleasure and the clear currents of the rivers. Heroes
receiving favours always return them; the ungrateful lose the friendship
of the honest." Considering Rāma’s words as highly sound and welcoming
them therefore, Lakshmana, with folded hands, spake unto Rāma of
graceful appearance, displaying his own intelligence—"O lord of men, I
fully approve of all thou hast said. The monkey-chief shall soon engage
in our service. Resolved on the destruction of thy enemy, do thou spend
here this rainy season awaiting the autumn. Subduing thy wrath, and
awaiting the autumn, do thou with me spend these four months in this
hill filled with deer, capable as thou art of encompassing the
destruction of thy enemy."

  ¹¹⁷ A small tree—Vitex negundo.—T.

  ¹¹⁸ A kind of tree—Acacia Sirisa.—T.

  ¹¹⁹ A tree—Pentaptera arjunee.—T.

  ¹²⁰ The _Sala_ tree (Shorea robusta) another tree (Pentaptera
      Arjuna).—T.

  ¹²¹ The river Ganges—literally~the daughter of _Janhu_ a saint. The
      Ganges is called so on account of her supposed origination from
      the thigh of the great saint.—T.

  ¹²² The name of a mountain—literally it means—having three peaks.—T.

  ¹²³ A tree (Dalbergia onjeimaisis)—Mountain ebony.—T.

  ¹²⁴ A sort of pine, (Pinis longifolia)—T.

  ¹²⁵ A sort of cane or ratan, (Calamas Rotany).—T.




## SECTION XXVIII.


Thereupon encompassing the destruction of Vāli, installing Sugriva and
dwelling on the summit of the Mālyabana hill, Rāma spake unto Lakshmana,
saying, "This is the time —the beginning of the rainy season—do thou
behold the sky enveloped witn clouds resembling so many hills. The sky,
drinking the liquid contents of the ocean through the rays of the Sun,
and being _enceinte_ for nine months, is giving birth to showers.
Ascending the sky by the steps of clouds, one can ornament the Sun with
garlands of _Kutajas_ and _Arjunas_. Like unto a wound covered with a
torn cloth, the sky is enveloped with cool clouds, coppery with the rays
of the setting Sun, and yellow at another end. The sky, having mild
breezes as its breath, sprinkled with sandal-like evening rays and
covered with yellow clouds, is appearing as it were like one stricken
with _amour_. The earth, afflicted with perspiration and filled with new
water, is emitting forth vapour like unto Sitā racked with sorrow.
_Ketaka_ smelling breezes may be drunk up in the cavity formed by
putting the hands together, like unto cold water discharged off the
clouds and mixed with camphor. This hill, having blown _Arjunas_ and
_Ketakas_ and rid of its enemies like unto Sugriva, hath been bathed
with showers. These hillocks, having clouds for dark deer-skins, heavy
showers for sacred threads and having caves filled with air, are
appearing like so many _Brahmins_ who have finished their studies. The
sky, being struck by thunders like unto so many golden lashes, is, as
if, groaning under a deep mental agony. Methinks, the lightning, shining
by the violet clouds, is appearing like unto the poor Vaidehi at the lap
of Rāvana. These quarters, enveloped with clouds and having therefore
the Moon and stars hidden, are indeed very pleasant unto those who are
under the influence of Cupid. Behold, O Saumitri, on the summits of the
hill the flowery _Kutajas_ enveloped with the vapour arising out of the
earth, gladdened at the approach of the rainy season and exciting my
_amour_ who am stricken with grief. (In this season) the dust is
watered, the air is saturated with dews, all the evils of the summer are
stopped, the kings no longer proceed on royal marches and those
journeying in a foreign land return their native homes. The
_Chakrabākas_ along with their mates are proceeding, being desirous to
live in the _Mānasa Saravara_; and in consequence of incessant rains,
chariots and other conveyances cannot pass along the wayfares. Somewhere
hidden, somehere open, the sky, covered with clouds, appears like a vast
ocean, being encircled here and there with hills. There speedily pass by
the hill streams, being resounded with the cries of peacocks, carrying
with the current _Sarja_ and _Kadamva_ flowers and having their coppery
contents mixed with the metals of the mountain. People (in this season)
live upon many a sweet rose-apple; and ripe mangoes, of diverse colors,
being shaken by the wind, fall on the earth. The clouds, resembling the
summits of a mountain, having lightnings for pennons and cranes for
garlands, are muttering like unto infuriated elephants in a field of
battle. The forest-lands, having their green pastures emerged in water,
with peacocks dancing all around with joy and clouds discharging their
watery volumes incessantly, are appearing more graceful in the evening.
(In this season) clouds, surrounded by cranes and heavily laden with
water, are constantly moving, sometimes resting on the high summits of
the mountains and emitting a muttering sound. And rows of cranes, fond
of clouds, rising up in the sky, delighted and moved by the wind, are
appearing like a garland of white lotuses, spread along the welkin. And
the earth, covered with green grass and variegated with newly born
insects, is appearing like a damsel clothed with a white blanket spotted
here and there with lac. (In this part of the year) sleep is gradually
overcoming the great God _Nārāyana_, the river is flowing speedily
towards the ocean, the delghted cranes are approaching the clouds and
the damsels are proceeding towards their lovers. The peacocks are
dancing at the forest skirts, the _Kadamva_ trees are covered with
flowers, the bulls have become attached unto kine and the earth has
become charming with corns and forests. The rivers are flowing by; the
clouds are discharging waters; the infuriated elephants are emitting
terrible roars; the forest-lands are growing more charming; persons,
separated from their wives, are growing more anxious; the peacocks are
dancing with delight and the monkeys are greatly comforted for Sugriva’s
attaining to the kingdom. By the fountains in the forests, the
infuriated elephants delighted with the fragrance of the _Ketaka_
flowers and maddened with the noise of the water falls, are emitting
terrible roars along with the peacocks. The black bees, resorting to the
branches of the _Kadamba_ trees and overwhelmed with showers, are, as
if, slowly discharging their temporal juice— namely the honey of flowers
collected by them ere while. The branches of rose-apple trees containing
enough of fruits like unto a collection of char coal are so appearing as
if the black bees are drinking the juice thereof. The dense clouds,
ornamented with pennon-like lightnings and emitting terrible roars, are
appearing like so many elephants, mad after fighting. The infuriated
lord of elephants, following in the track and ranging in the hills and
forests, hearing the muttering of clouds and taking it for the uproar of
another elephant, has turned back, with a view to enter into conflict
with him. Somewhere the bees are humming, somewhere the peacocks are
dancing —somewhere are ranging the infuriated elephants—and in this way
the forest-land has assumed diverse appearances. It appears like unto a
drinking-place,covered with _Kadambas_, _Sarjas_, _Arjunas_ and lotuses
growing on land, filled with water resembling honey and with the dance
and cries of mad peacocks. The birds, having their wings discolored,
being wet with water, delighted and thirsty, are drinking the drops of
clear water falling on leaves and discharged by the Lord of
celestials.¹²⁶ The sonorous humming of the bees, being accompanied by
the gutteral sound of the frogs and the mutterings of the clouds,
resembling the sound of _Mridangas_, an organised music, as if, hath
begun in the forest. Sometimes dancing, sometimes setting up loud cries,
sometimes placing themselves against the tops of the trees, the
peacocks, having beautifully ornamented exteriors, have commenced music
in the forest. And rising from their perpetual sleep by the muttering of
clouds, the frogs, assuming various shapes and making diverse sounds,
are setting up cries being distressed with new watery showers. The
rivers, carrying _Chakrabākas_ as their breast and leaving behind their
old banks, are approaching, being excited, their own lord with various
new presents. Clouds, big with new waters coming in contact with violet
ones are appearing as such; and sometimes, touching the hills burnt by
forest-fire, are appearing like deep-rooted hills. The elephants are
ranging in this charming forest-land, carrying the fragrance of _Neepas_
and _Arjunas_, having its green swards filled with _Indragopas_¹²⁷ and
with delighted, peacocks dancing all around. The black bees, delighted,
are drinking honey, embracing the shower-distressed and new filaments of
the lotuses and _Kadamva_ flowers. (In this season) the elephants are
infuriated, the bulls are delighted, the lions have grown more powerful,
the hills are charming— the kings are devoid of all active pursuits, and
the Lord of celestials is engaged in sport with clouds. The clouds
ranging in the welkin and discharging heavy showers, are roaring like
unto ocean; and the rivers, ponds and pools are deluging the earth with
their watery contents. (In this season) heavy showers set in—the wind
bloweth mightily and the rivers breaking down their banks flow quickly
blockading the wayfares. The mountains are, as if, displaying their own
beauty and grace being as it were bathed by the cloud-like jars,
conferred by the lord of celestials and brought by the wind like unto a
king sprinkled by men. The sky is enveloped with clouds and neither the
sun nor the stars can be seen— the earth is satisfied with new
showers—and the quarters being covered with darkness cannot be seen. The
high summits, of the mountains, being washed by showers and beautified
by far-stretching waterfalls resembling pearls, are appearing more
graceful. The heavy mountain waterfalls, losening the rocks and
stretching over the caves filled with the cries of peacocks, are
appearing like a pearl-necklace. And the quick streaming waterfalls, of
the mountains, washing the summits of the hills, and resembling the
pearls, are being deposited in the cave at the foot. And watery drops
resembling the pearls of the necklaces used by celestial damsels are
pouring on all sides. The setting of the Sun is announced by the birds
taking to their nests, lotuses growing pale and _Mālatis_ blossoming.
The royal marches are all stopped, and the soldiers, who have already
marched are waiting in the way—hostility and wayfares have been equally
blockaded by water. This month of _Bhādra_ is the time of studying for
those Brahmins, who chant _Sāma Vedas_. Having roofed all his houses and
stored up his food, Bharata, the king of Koçala hath set upon the
performance of _Ashara_ sacrifices. The river _Saraju_ is now brimful
with water. Seeing me return as if Ayodhya herself is making a
delightful noise. Clearly manifest are now all the signs of the rainy
season and Sugriva, rid of his enemies, established on the vast kingdom,
and regaining his wives, hath attained to best felicity. And I am, O
Lakshmana, waning everyday like unto the banks of a river, being
separated from my spouse and deprived of my vast kingdom. Immense is my
grief, inaccessible is this rainy season and mighty is my enemy, Rāvana;
methinks it is impossible for me to bring about the discomfiture of my
foe. Owing to the unfitness of the season (for marching against my foe)
and the wayfares being inacessible, I cannot possibly request Sugriva
(to march) although he is prepared to abide by my mandate. Moreover
after a good deal of affliction he has regained his wives, and my
service is of very great difficulty; so I do not wish to request that
monkey-chief now. Forsooth, shall Sugriva think of the benefits (he has
received from me) after enjoying rest for sometime, when the time for
action shall arrive. Therefore I shall, O Lakshmana, live here, awaiting
the pleasure of Sugriva and the clear currents of the rivers (the
autumn). Heroes receiving benefits, do always return them. The
ungrateful lose the good wishes of the great ones." Being thus accosted,
Lakshmana, with folded hands, respecting highly his words, spake unto
the graceful Rāma, pointing out his own welfare. "Forsooth shall that
lord of monkeys carry out all thy wishes. Do thou therefore spend here
the rainy season, awaiting the autumn."

  ¹²⁶ According to Hindu mythology Indra is the god of rains.—T.

  ¹²⁷ An insect (Coccinella of various kinds).—T.




## SECTION XXIX.


Beholding the clear welkin, void of clouds and lightnings, filled with
_Sarasas_ and sprinkled with the charming rays of the Moon, Hanumān, the
son of Marut, versed in religious lore and political economy, and
conversant with effects proper to the time or season, approaching the
Lord of monkeys, addressed him with various sound, reasonable and
pleasant words, well-meaning, true and teaching the means of acquiring
forgiveness, piety and wealth. Acquiring riches Sugriva hath grown
careless for the collection of righteousness and wealth, is following
the track of the vicious, and is addicted to the satisfaction of sensual
appetites—having all his actions stopped and desires attained—and given
to enjoyments with damsels. Having attained all his desires and wishes,
his own wife and the much-desired-for Tārā, Sugriva is sporting with
them, day and night, without any affliction, like unto the Lord of
celestials with _Gandharbas_ and _Apsarās_. Placing all the royal
affairs at the hands of the counsellors, without looking to them, and
confiding fully in their abilities he is living like one under the
influence of passions—"Thou hast attained thy kingdom, fame, and thy
vast ancestral wealth. It now behoveth thee to perform thy duties by thy
friends. Truly doth his kingdom, fame and prowess increase who is
cognizant of the seasonableness of time and doth good to his friends. O
king, truly doth he attain to a vast kingdom, who hath the same wealth,
soldiery and body with his friends. It becometh thee, therefore, who art
crowned with a good character, and who dost wend a blameless track, to
work out thy friend’s well-being (as promised by thee). He who doth not
engage in the service of his friends renouncing all business, becometh
void of all energy and involved in unnecessary troubles. And he, who
engageth in his friend’s service after the proper season is over, does
nothing to his well-being, though he performs a great thing. O slayer of
foes, soon shall the time for performing thy friend’s service, be over;
do thou therefore encompass Rāghava’s good, namely the searching out of
Vaidehi. O king, Rāma, conversant with the seasonableness of time and
wise as he is, is not informing thee of it, though the proper time is
past; and though he is in hurry, he is waiting for thee. Rāghava as well
as Lakshmana, who are the instruments of thy attaining to this vast
kingdom, and thy friends for so long a time, are persons of incomparable
prowess by virtue of their unequalled accomplishments. He hath already
performed thy service, and it behoveth thee now, O lord of monkeys, to
command the foremost of monkeys to engage in his service. To engage, out
of season, in a service, uncalled for, is not blameable; but to defer
the performance of an action in proper time after promising is indeed an
object of censure. O lord of monkeys, thou dost engage even in the
service of one who doth thee no good, then why shalt thou not engage in
the benefit of Rāma who hath favoured thee by encompassing the
destruction (of Vāli) and securing for thee thy kingdom? O lord of
monkeys and bears, truly thou art gifted with prowess and strength, why
dost thou not prepare thyself for satisfying Daçarathee’s commands?
Daçarathee himself is capable of subduing the celestials, Asuras and
great serpents—he is simply awaiting the fulfilment of thy promise. He
hath performed a great service at the risk of his life—we shall
therefore find out Vaidehi whether she is in this earth or in the
welkin. Even the celestials, Dānavas, Gandharbas, Asuras, Marutas,
Yakshas are afraid of him in the battlefield—what of the insignificant
Rākshasas. O lord of monkeys, it therefore behoveth thee to do good by
all means unto the powerful Rāma, who benefitted thee before. O lord of
monkeys, who is there amongst us, who shall not at thy command proceed
unto water, sky or the region under the earth? O blameless one, there
are more than one _koti_ of invincible monkeys under thee, do thou
command, who shall proceed and to what quarter?" Hearing these words of
Hanumān, said on a very proper occasion, the intelligent Sugriva, made
up his mind for a worthy end. Thereupon the highly intelligent Sugriva
ordered the ever active Neela, to collect soldiers from various
quarters. "Do thou so arrange as all my hosts and soldiers with their
commanders soon come here. Do thou soon bring here at my behest all the
energetic and quick-coursing monkeys and commanders spreading their
conquests to the end of the earth. (After their arrival) do thou thyself
inspect and count all those monkeys. He who shall not reach here within
fifteen days shall be punished with the loss of his life. There is no
need of scrutinizing my orders. Abiding by my order, do thou see along
with Angada all the elderly monkeys." Having thus arranged, that best of
monkeys entered the inner apartment.




## SECTION XXX.


Sugriva having entered his palace, and the sky being cleared of the
clouds, Rāma, racked with grief, passing the rainy season and beholding
the yellow welkin, the clear disc of the Moon, the autumnal night
sprinkled with the rays of the Moon, the _amour_-stricken lord of
monkeys, the ravishment of the daughter of Janaka, and the season
well-nigh expired, became overwhelmed with sorrow and senseless. And
regaining his sense after sometime, the highly intelligent king—Rāghava
began to think of Vaidehi although always present in his mind. And
beholding the clear sky void of lightnings and clouds and filled with
the noise of _Sārasas_, Rāghava began to lament piteously, stationing
himself on the summit of the hill ornamented with metals of golden hue.
And beholding the autumnal sky he engaged in the meditation of his
beloved spouse. How shall that _Sārasa_-voiced damsel be pleased to-day,
who, while sporting in the hermitage, used to warble like _Sārasas_, to
invite them. Beholding _Asana_ trees, as if covered with golden flowers
and not beholding me how shall that damsel be pleased? How that
exquisitely fine damsel having a sweet voice shall be pleased to-day,
who used formerly to awake at the sounds of the drakes? Hearing the
noise of her companions—_Chakrabākas_, how shall that one, of expansive
eyes resembling lotuses, live? Without her having the eyes of a fawn, I
do not attain to felicity to-day, ranging at large by ponds, streams,
pools and in forests and woods. Forsooth shall Cupid excited by the
approach of the autumn, distress her the more on account of my
separation and her personal charms." Thus bewailed that best son of a
king like unto the bird _Sāranga_ soliciting water from the lord of
celestials. And the graceful Lakshmana, returning from the picturesque
mountain-summits where he had sojourned in quest of fruits, beheld his
elder brother. And beholding in that lonely forest his brother, racked
with anxious thoughts hard to bear and almost beside himself (with
grief) the high-minded Saumitri, prompted by his brother’s grief, spoke
unto him very poorly, saying:—"O worshipful one, what hast thou
perpetrated by placing thyself under the control of passions and
defeating thy manliness? Thy deep and devout meditation hath been
purloined by thy grief; and it is by religious contemplation that thy
grief shall be terminated now. O brother, after going through the
ceremonies of bathing and so forth, and acquiring peace, do thou bring
all thy time under thy control by virtue of the concentration of soul;
and being of unmitigated strength do thou resort to power and help, the
key-notes for the accomplishment of thy great object. O lord of men,
Jānaki, husbanded by thee, is not capable of being easily possessed by
others. O hero who getting at a flame of fire, doth not burn himself?"
Thereupon Rāma spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted with royal marks, addressing
him with natural and resolute words and saying:— "What thou hast said,
is sound, well-meaning, sanctioned by polity and speaks of piety, wealth
and forgiveness. It should therefore, without the least doubt, be
performed by me. It behoveth me to engage in contemplation about the
eternal truth regarding the Deity and in ascetic observances. Or else O
Prince, it is not proper to think of the fruits of a difficult, highly
developed and energetic action." Thereupon thinking of Maithelee, having
eyes resembling lotus-petals, Rāma spoke unto Lakshmana with a dried
countenance. "Having satisfied the earth with a profuse discharge of
water, produced crops and thus, finished his work, the thousand eyed
Deity is sitting silent. O son of a king, the clouds, muttering a long
and deep sound and approaching the hills and trees, are calmed having
discharged their liquid contents. Having made the ten quarters dark
blue, the clouds, resembling blue lotuses, have become calm, like unto
elephants without temporal juice. O gentle one, high gales accompanied
with rains, big with water and fragrant with _Kutaja_ and _Arjuna_
flowers being driven before hither and thither, have now become silent O
innocent Lakshmana, the sounds of clouds, elephants, peacocks, and
fountains, have been all stopped. Hills, having variegated summits,
being washed by dense clouds and thus free from dirt and impurities, do
appear elegant being sprinkled by the rays of the Moon. Forsooth hath
the autumn set in, dividing its grace in the branches of _Saptachada_
trees, in the rays of the Sun and Moon with stars and in the gaits of
the excellent elephants. Surely hath the autumnal grace resorted to many
things. And it hath appeared more profusely in the lotuses blossomed by
the first rays of the Sun. Scented sweet with the flower of _Saptachada_
trees, borowing the musical notes of bees, following the wind and
subduing the pride of infuriated elephants, the autumn is appearing very
elegant. The swans are playing with _Chakrabakas_ having splendidly
spacious wings, fond of cupid, crusted with the filaments of lotuses,
and arriving at the banks of the rivers. The autumnal grace is appearing
more elegant being divided in infuriated elephants, in proud kine, and
in streams of clear currents. Beholding the sky divested of clouds,
without manifesting the beauty of their tails and renouncing their
attachment unto their beloved mates, amusements and beauty, the peacocks
are as if all engaged in meditation in the forest. The forest-lands are
as if a-blaze with many a sweet-scented picturesque _Priyaka_ trees,
having a golden hue and their tops lowered down with the weight of
flowers. The gaits, of the elephants rendered idle with a profuse
discharge of temporal juice, fond of forests and water lilies, smelling
the fragrance of the flowers of _Saptachhada_ trees and accompanied by
their mates, have become slow. The sky is clear like unto a sword—the
streams have become of feeble currents—the wind, cool and scented with
the fragrance of white esculent waterlilies, is blowing—and quarters
have become devoid of darkness. The mud has been dried up by the rays of
the Sun and the earth is filled with dust—this is the time for
preparation for inimical kings (to enter into conflict). The bulls,
having their beauty enhanced by the autumn, and their body covered with
dust, delighted, infuriated and hence desirous of entering into
skirmish, have been setting up terrible roars in the midst of kine. The
she-elephants, moving slowly, fond, passionate and accompanied by other
members, have been following their passionate mates, in the forest,
embracing them. Leaving behind their excellent ornaments—the tails, the
peacocks, getting at the banks of the rivers, have been going away
poorly and with depressed hearts as if being remonstrated with by the
_Sārasas_. Having terrified the _Kārandavas_ and _Chakrabakas_ with
their mighty roars, the elephants, having cleft trunks and being
agitated again and again, have been drinking water in the ponds filled
with full blown lotuses. The drakes have been jumping delightedly into
the rivers, mudless, covered with sands, full of clear water, filled
with kine and resounded with the notes of _Sārasas_. Now hath stopped
the noise of rivers, clouds, fountains, water, the high winds, the
peacocks and the mirthless frogs. And venomous snakes of vareiagated
colors, having lived for a pretty long time during the rains without
food, have on the approach of the autumn, come out of their dens,
hungry, in quest of their prey. The red-dyed evening hath renounced the
welkin, being delighted at the touch of the rays of the Moon and opening
a little her eyes—the stars. Having the rising Moon for her elegant
countenance, the stars for her excellent open eyes and the rays for a
piece of white garment, the night appeareth like a damsel wearing a
white cloth. Having fed on ripe white rice, the excellent rows of
delighted _Sārasas_ are flying quickly up to the sky like unto a
well-strung garland shaken by the wind. The water, of the lake filled
with sleeping drakes and water lilies, is appearing like the sky in the
night, devoid of clouds and filled with the Full Moon and stars. The
ponds, having the drakes scattering hither and thither for their girdles
and engarlanded with full blown lotuses and water lilies, are appearing
like so many damsels ornamented with diverse ornaments. The sound set up
by the wind in the dawn like unto that of a pipe accompanied by the
music of a trumpet, being mixed with the noise of the caves and bulls
are as if multiplying each other. The banks of the rivers are being
dressed by the newly blossomed flowers shaken by the mild breezes and
Kāças. like unto clean, washed silken clothes. The black bees, bold,
given to drinking honey, rendered yellow with the filaments of lotuses
and _Asana_ flowers, delighted and accompanied by their mates are
following the wind in the forest. The clear water, the blossoming
flowers, the noise of _Craunchas_, the ripe white rice, the mild
breezes, the clear Moon announce the approach of the Autumn—the removers
of the rains. The rivers, having fishes for their girdles, have become
of slackened course like unto damsels moving slowly in the dawn being
enjoyed by their husbands. The mouths of the rivers, filled with
_Chakrabākas_, covered with aquatic plants and clothed with _Kāças_ are
appearing like unto the countenances of damsels pasted with yellow
pigments. The most powerful Cupid hath taken up his terrible bow in this
forest filled with _Asana_ flowers appearing like unto arrows and the
hum of delighted bees. Having satisfied the people with a profuse
discharge of water, filled the rivers and pools and covered the earth
with crops, the clouds have disappeared renouncing the sky. The rivers
in this season of autumn have been gradually showing their banks. O thou
of excellent looks, the ponds (in this season) appear exquisitely fine,
being filled with _Kurara_ birds and _Chakrabākas_. O son of king, this
is the time of preparation for inimical kings, desirous of defeating one
another. O son of a king, this is the best time for royal marches, but I
do not find Sugriva preparing himself for that end. There appear on the
summits of the hills flowers _Asanas_, _Saptaparnas_, _Kavidāras_,
_Bandhugeebas_, and _Tamālās_. Behold, O Lakshmana, the banks of the
rivers filled with swans, _Sārasas_, _Chakrabākas_ and _Kuraras_.
Stricken as I am with grief, these four months, the season of rains,
appeared unto me like a hundred year, not beholding Sitā. Like unto
_Chakrabākas_ following their mates, Sitā, taking the terrible forest of
Dandaka for a picturesque garden, used to follow me there. O Lakshmana,
Sugriva, is not inclined to show any commiseration towards me, who am
separated from my beloved spouse, deprived of my kingdom, banished and
striken with sorrow. Regarding me as one without any to back him,
deprived of his kingdom, insulted by Rāvana, wretched, of a distant
land, under the influence of amour and therefore seeking his help,
(Sugriva hath not felt pity for me). O subduer of foes, O thou of
excellent looks, for these reasons, I have been insulted by that
vicious-souled king of monkeys—Sugriva. Having appointed the time to
institute enquiries about Sitā, that wicked-minded one hath now forgot
it on the accession of his new dignity. Do thou therefore repair to
Kishkindhā and speak of me unto that stupid lord of monkeys—Sugriva,
addicted to rural enjoyments. And do thou tell him—’He, who breaks his
promise made unto a powerful benefactor who solicits his favour, is
regarded by people as vile. He is a true hero and an excellent person
who verifies his words whether good or bad. Ungrateful they are who do
not, after attaining their ends, engage in the service of those of their
friends who have not accomplished their objects; even those living on
raw flesh do not feed on their gore after their death’. And ask him if
he wishes to behold in battle-field the golden bow resembling a
lightning. And ask him more, if he wishes to hear the terrible twang of
my bow resembling the noise of thunder, when I am enraged in battle. O
hero, O son of a king, when apprised of my prowess assisted by thee,
will he not recapitulate in his mind (that he may be destroyed by us
like unto Vāli)? O conqueror of enemies’ cities, does not that lord of
monkeys, after accomplishing his object, think of the conditions under
which our friendship was contracted? Does not that lord of monkeys think
that he has spent four months in enjoyments, having promised and
appointed the season, after rains, (for making) enquiries about Sitā"?
Does not Sugriva feel pity for us, who are racked with sorrow, being
addicted to drinking with friends and counsellors? Do thou go, O hero, O
thou of mighty strength and relate unto Sugriva these my angry words. ’O
Sugriva, do not neglect thy promise and wend the way trodden by Vāli. I
killed Vāli only with my shaft in the battle-field; but if thou dost
deviate from the path of truth I shall destroy thee along with thy
kinsmen and relatives.’ O thou best of men, do thou speedily relate unto
him all those benefits which we shall reap by his actions, for the
proper season is well-nigh past. O best of monkeys, do thou carry out
thy promise remembering the eternal existence of virtue. Do thou not
behold the spirit of Vāli in the abode of Death, being killed by the
shaft discharged by me." Beholding his elder brother thus enraged and
bewailing, the fiery-spirited Lakshmana, the best of men, became enraged
with Sugriva.




## SECTION XXXI.


Lakshmana again addressed his high-minded elder brother, the son of a
king, influenced by passion, stricken with grief, and poorly, with the
following words. "That monkey shall not follow the actions of the pious,
shall not think of the great fruit (the accession of kingdom) reaped by
our friendship; he shall not enjoy the riches of the monkey-kingdom
because he has not the right understanding to make good his promise.
Owing to the wane of his understanding in consequence of thy favour he
is addicted to rural enjoyments and hath forgot to return thy benefits.
O hero, killed let him espy his elder brother Vāli. It is not proper to
confer kingdom upon that wicked-minded one. I am unable to bear the
outburst of my ire—forsooth shall I kill to-day—that liar Sugriva. May
the son of Vāli with other principal monkeys engage in quest of that
daughter a king." Beholding him rise up from the seat with bow in his
hand and greatly wrought up with anger and hearing him thus announce his
intention about the destruction of Sugriva, Rāma, the slayer of foes,
spake unto him the following humble words worthy of being spoken on that
occasion. "Persons like thee on this earth do not perpetrate the crime
of destroying their friends. He is truly a great hero and an excellent
person who subdues anger by his right understanding, O Lakshmana, it is
not proper for thee to bring about the destruction of thy friend; do
thou follow thy former friendship and good feelings. Avoiding harsh
words do thou address Sugriva, who has violated his promise, with
soothing words." Being thus duly counselled by his elder brother, that
best of men, the heroic Lakshmana—the slayer of foes, entered the city.
Thereupon the highly intelligent Lakshmana of right understanding, and
ever intent upon the welfare of his brother, taking up a bow like unto
Indra’s, resembling the summit of a hill and terrible as Death himself,
entered, wrought up with ire, the abode of the king of monkeys like the
hill Mandāra. Intelligent like _Vrihaspati_ and ever abiding by his
elder brother’s behest, Lakshmana, revolving in his mind what he should
say as well as Sugriva’s answers, and enveloped with the fire of anger
arising from the excitement of his brother’s _amour_, and therefore
displeased, proceeded quick as air. And on he proceeded, felling down by
his velocity, _Sāla_, _Tāla_, and _Asvakarna_ trees, throwing aside the
mountain summits and other trees, breaking rocks into pieces with his
feet and striding very quickly like unto a fleet-coursing elephant. And
that best of Ikshwākus, beheld that splendid city of the king of
monkeys, hard to enter, surrounded by monkey-herds, and mountains. And
having his lips swollen with anger for Sugriva, Lakshmana beheld the
terrible monkeys walking outside the city. Beholding that best of
men—Lakshmana, the monkeys resembling elephants entered the mountainous
stronghold and took up the summits of the hill and huge trees. And
observing them armed, Lakshmana was doubly inflamed with anger like unto
fire kindled with fuels. And beholding Lakshmana, highly enraged,
terrible as Death himself at the time of dissolution, the monkeys
stricken with fear, fled away, by hundreds, into various quarters.
Thereat those foremost of monkeys, entering the palace of Sugriva,
communicated unto him, Lakshmana’s ire and approach. That amorous chief
of monkeys, attached unto Tārā, paid no heed to the words of those
foremost of monkeys. Thereupon those terrible monkeys, resembling hills,
elephants and clouds, went out of the city being commanded by the
minister. Some of them had sharpened teeth and nails, some were
grim-visaged, some had teeth like those of tigers, some had the strength
of ten elephants, some had the strength of a hundred elephants and some
had that of a thousand elephants. Thereupon Lakshmana, angry, espied the
city of _Kishkindhdā_ hard to enter and surrounded by mighty monkeys
with trees in their hands. And getting over the ditch around the city
walls, those terrible-looking monkeys stationed themselves openly. And
meditating upon Sugriva’s error and his brother’s interest, the
self-controlled Lakshmana, heroic, proceeded onwards. Sighing hot and
hard, that best of men—Lakshmana, with reddened eyes appeared like unto
smoky fire. He appeared like unto a terrible serpent of five mouths,
having the top of the arow for his tongue, the bow for his expanded hood
and his own prowess for the poison. Beholding him like the flaming fire
of dissolution and enraged lord of serpents, Angada, out of fear, became
exceedingly sorry. Thereupon the far-famed Lakshmana, having his eyes
reddened with ire, spoke unto Angada, saying"—O child, do thou inform
Sugriva of my arrival. O conqueror of foes, do thou tell him:—
Lakshmana, the younger brother of Rāma, being stricken with grief on
account of his brother’s disaster, hath come to thee and is waiting at
the gate. If it pleaseth thee, do thou make good thy promise.’ Saying
these words do thou speedily return, O my child, O conqueror of foes."
Hearing Lakshmana’s words, Angada, overwhelmed with grief, aproaching
his uncle said—’Saumitree hath arrived here.’ Being greatly agitated
with harsh words, Angada, with a pale and poorly countenance issued out
speedily and approaching, touched first the king’s feet and afterwards
with reverence Rumā’s feet. That one of exceeding prowess first touched
the feet of his uncle then saluted again his mother and afterwards
touching the feet of Rumā related unto them every thing in full. That
monkey, possessed by _amour_ and under the influence of liquor, being
asleep could not hear (what Angada had said). Beholding Lakshmana highly
enraged, the monkeys, possessed by fear, began to make noise as they
were welcoming him. They, approaching Lakshmana began to set up a
terrible roar like unto thunder and resembling the uproar of lions and
the noise of water-falls. By that terrible sound awoke that
monkey-chief, having coppery eyes, agitated, adorned with garlands and
possessed by liquor. Hearing the words of Angada, the two counsellors of
Sugriva, intelligent and of magnificent looks, along with him,
approached that lord of monkeys. And those two ministers _Yaksha_ and
_Pravaba_, to give him proper counsels, informed (that monkey-chief) of
the arrival of Lakshmana. Satisfying Sugriva with words pointing out his
welfare, they sitting by him, spake unto that lord of wind resembling
the king of celestials, saying:—"Of those two great and truthful
brothers Rāma and Lakshmana, who are born as men, worthy of attaining to
kingdom and who have gained for thee thy kingdom, Lakshmana, with a bow
in his hand, is waiting at thy gate. And afraid of whom, the monkeys,
trembling, are setting up terrible roars. That Lakshmana, Rāghava’s
brother, having words for his charioteer, and perseverance for his
chariot, hath approached thee at his brother’s command. O blameless
king, by that Lakshmana—Tārā’s darling, Angada hath been despatched unto
thee. O king, of monkeys, that highly powerful one, having his eyes full
of ire, is waiting at thy gate, as if burning down with his eyes all the
monkeys. O king, along with thy children and friends do thou repair unto
him speedily and bowing unto him with thy head down do thou pacify his
wrath. And do thou, O king, with a composed heart, perform what the
virtuous-souled Rāma hath ordered thee to do and thus fulfil thy
promise.




## SECTION XXXII.


Hearing the words of Angada as well as of Lakshmana’ s wrath, the
self-controlled Sugriva along with his counsellors, left his seat.
Ascertaining the weight and lightness of the present occasion, that one,
expert in counsels and abiding by their advice spake unto the expert
counsellors, saying:—"I have not done him any wrong, nor have I spoken
unto him any improper word. I do not know why Rāghaya’s brother
Lakshmana hath become offended with me. Lakshmana hath been falsely
apprised of my imaginary weakness by my enemies, always looking to my
dark sides. It behoveth ye all, to ascertain now speedily according to
your knowledge and right understanding (the cause of Lakshmana’s wrath).
I do not fear Lakshmana or Rāghava; but friends enraged without any
cause do invariably produce fear. It is easy to contract friendship but
very difficult to sustain it; for owing to the fickleness of our minds,
a very slight cause brings about separation. I have not done him any
good proportionate to what the high-souled Rāma had done for me; and it
is for this reason that I am afraid of him." Being thus addressed by
Sugriva—Hanumān, the foremost of monkey-counsellors, spoke, according to
his own understanding, saying:—"It is no wonder, O lord of monkeys, that
thou hast not forgot the unexpected benefit, (thou hadst received at the
hands of Rāma). To encompass thy well-being, Vāli, powerful as the Lord
of celestials, was fearlessly destroyed by the heroic Rāghava. There is
not the least doubt, that Rāghava, out of love, is enraged with thee,
and hath despatched his younger brother Lakshmana, the enhancer of
prosperity. O thou foremost of those conversant with time, the
auspicious autumn, green with _Saptachhada_ flowers, hath set in and
thou, given up to enjoyments, doth not percieve it. The sky, having the
clouds removed, is full of clear stars and planets. The quarters, the
ponds and rivers are all clear. O best of monkeys, finding thee
forgetful, Lakshmana hath come here to inform thee that the proper time
hath arrived. Do thou patiently hear all these harsh words of the
high-souled Rāma, racked with sorrow and separated from his spouse,
which Lakshmana, shall relate unto thee. Thou hast acted improperly
towards him, and I do not find any thing tending to thy welfare but thy
satisfying Lakshmana with folded hands. The kings should be addressed
with auspicious words by their counsellors always ministering unto them
proper counsels. And it is for this reason, I am addressing thee with
these sound words. Rāghava, taking up his bow, while enraged, can bring
under subjection the entire world, inhabited by the celestials, _Asuras_
and _Gandharbas_. Remembering his former service, it doth not behove
thee, grateful as thou art, to excite his wrath, who should be pleased
again. Bowing unto him, with thy children and friends, do thou, O king,
satisfying thy promise, seek his shelter like unto a wife placing
herself under the control of her husband. O lord of monkeys, it doth not
behove thee, to neglect even in thought, the behests of Rāma and his
younger brother; for thou art fully aware of the prowess of Rāghava like
unto the lord of celestials, and passing human power.




## SECTION XXXIII.


Thereupon, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes, commanded, entered, at the
behest of Rāma, the pleasant city of Kishkindhā situated in the centre
of caves. Beholding Lakshmana, the highly powerful monkeys, having huge
persons and waiting at the gate, stood all with folded hands. And seeing
Daçaratha’s son highly enraged and sighing again and again, the monkeys
stood silent and did not interrupt him. The graceful Lakshmana espied
that huge picturesque and celestial cave adorned with jewels and flowery
gardens. It was filled with palatial buildings, various jewels and
flowery trees, producing at all times wished-for fruits. It was
beautified with good-looking monkeys—children of the celestials and
_Gandharbas_ wearing celestial garlands and clothes and assuming shapes
at will. It was fragrant with the sweet smell of sandal wood, _Aguru_
and lotuses and its highways were equally fragrant with the smell of
honey. And Lakshmana beheld there many spacious buildings like unto the
hills _Vindhya_ and _Meru_ and rivers of clear water. And he also
surveyed the picturesque dwellings of Angada, Mainda, Divida, Gavaya,
Gabaksha, Gaja, Sarava, Vidhutmali, Sampāti, Suryaksha, Hanumān,
Beerabahu, Subahu, Nala, Kumuda, Sushena, Tārā, Jambabān, Dadhibaktra,
Neela, Sunetra and Supātala like unto sable clouds adorned with
excellent garlands, filled with rice and jewels and beautiful damsels.
Unobstructed the highly powerful Saumitri entered the picturesque abode
of Sugriva like unto the Sun entering into a collection of dense clouds.
The abode of this lord of monkeys was like unto the palace of the Lord
of celestials, ornamented with the tops of white buildings resembling
the summits of the Kailaça hill and flowery trees producing at all
times, wished-for fruits; covered with beautiful trees having cool
shades and bearing celestial fruits and flowers resembling the
molten-gold. And that virtuous-souled one, crossing the seven rooms
filled with conveyances and seats beheld the secret apartment (of that
monkey-chief), having many a gold and silver bed-steads with excellent
coverlets and fine seats. No sooner had he entered the inner apartment
than he heard a musical sound, well-measured and accompanied by the
music of the stringed instrument. And that highly powerful one beheld in
the abode of Sugriva many a beautiful damsel proud of their youth and
beauty, sprung from respectable families, adorned with splendid
ornaments, engaged in stringing excellent garlands. And he observed
Sugriva’s servants, well fed, contented, not hurry in offering their
services and without splendid ornaments. Hearing the sounds of women’s
girdles and their _Nupurs_,¹²⁸ the graceful Lakshmana became highly
ashamed. And highly enraged at the sound of the ornaments, the hero
filled all the quarters with the twang of his bow. Lakshmana of
mighty-arms stood silent in a nook, thinking of his improper conduct of
entering into (Sugriva’s) seraglio, albeit he was wrought up with ire in
consequence of Sugriva’s neglecting Rāma’s service. Thereupon Sugriva,
the lord of monkeys, being apprised of Lakshmana’s approach by the twang
of his bow and terrified, trembled on his throne, and thought
aside:—"Forsooth hath Saumitri, fond of his brother, come, whose
approach was announced by Angada before. Informed before by Angada of
his approach, and made doubly sure by the twang of the bow, that monkey
came to know of Lakshmana’s arrival and turned pale. Thereupon Sugriva,
the foremost of monkeys, wrought up with fear, addressed the fine
looking Tārā with the following well-meaning words:—"O beautiful lady,
dost thou know, why hath the mild-natured younger brother of Rāma,
arrived here enraged? O blameless lady, dost thou perceive any cause of
the Prince’s wrath? Forsooth, that best of men, is not enraged for a
slight cause. Considering aright, dost thou speedily inform me if I have
performed any improper act towards Rāma. O fine lady, do thou approach
him in person and pacify him with soothing words. Beholding thee, that
pure-souled one shall not be worked with ire; great men do never behave
roughly towards the females. Approaching him do thou console him and
thereafter I shall see that conqueror of foes having eyes resembling
lotus-petals." Thereupon Tārā, with faltering feet and eyes wild with
wine, the golden chains of her zone flowing (about her hips),—graced
with auspicious marks, saught Lakshmana’s presence with downcast looks.
Beholding Tārā, the queen of the lord of monkeys, Lakshmana, the
high-souled son of a king, restraining his anger on the approach of a
female, stood with his head hung down, conducting himself like an
ascetic. Renouncing modesty under the influence of liquor, and finding
the king’s son well pleased, Tārā spake unto Lakshmana, bold and loving
words, in order to console him. "O son of a king, what is the cause of
thy wrath? Who is there who hath not abode by thy commands? Who can
remain without anxiety, beholding fire in a forest filled with dried
trees?" Hearing the soothing words of Tārā, Lakshmana, undaunted, spoke
again, greatly manifesting his friendship:—"O thou intent on thy
husband’s welfare, dost thou not perceive that thy husband is by and by
losing piety and wealth, being addicted to amorous enjoyments? O Tārā,
thy husband doth not think of us who are moved with sorrow— but is
addicted to sensual enjoyments only, being surrounded by parasites.
(Having promised that he would institute enquiries about Sitā after four
months), that lord of monkeys hath well-nigh spent the entire period,
being influenced by liquor and addicted to enjoyments along with thee.
For the attainment of piety and wealth, drinking is not a proper course.
It is by drinking that people lose piety, wealth and desire. He who doth
not return the services of his benefactor, loseth piety. He who loseth
friendship with a qualified friend, loseth wealth. He is the best friend
who is gifted with wealth and is truthful; and thy husband hath
relinquished such a friend gifted with these two qualities. And,
therefore, he doth not abide by the virtue of preserving friendship. O
thou expert in business, this being the case, do thou advise us as to
what we should do." Hearing the sweet words of Lakshmana consonant with
piety and wealth, Tārā again addressed him about Rāma’s business, yet
remaining unaccomplished, with words inspiring confidence,—"O son of a
king, this is not the time for displaying thy wrath; it is not proper to
be angry with one’s own friends. O hero, it behoveth thee to put up with
the error of him who hath thy welfare in view. O prince, who,
accomplished with excellent virtues, gets enraged with one of inferior
merits? O prince, who, like thee, an offspring of asceticism, is worked
up with ire against the virtue of forgiveness? I know the (cause of the)
wrath of that heroic monkey’s friend. I know the time for action. I know
what thou hast done for us. I know what is due from us to thee. And, O
foremost of men, I also know the irrisistible force of Kāma. I know by
whom Sugriva has been taken captive, and that his heart is not now in
the work. As thou hast come under the governance of anger, thy mind has
not felt the influence of desire. Even a human being that hath conceived
love, does not stay for place or time or interest. Do thou forgive that
lord of the monkey race, thy brother, influenced by carnality, who is by
thee, and who through the urgency of lust, has banished shame. Even
Maharshis finding delight in religion and asceticism, setting their
hearts upon satisfying lust, (ultimately) become fast bound by
ignorance. But this is a monkey, volatile by nature, and hath,
furthermore, been enjoying regal state—why should _he_ not act thus?
Having thus said unto Lakshmana of immeasurable intelligence words
fraught with high import, that female monkey, her eyes drooping with
languor, again sadly spake in this wise for the behoof of her husband,
"O foremost of men, although Sugriva has come under the sway of desire,
he hath, to secure thy good, ere this issued orders for preparations to
be made. And monkeys by hundreds and thousands and _kotis_, inhabiting
various mountains, possessed of exceeding prowess, have already arrived
(here). Do thou therefore, O mighty-armed one, come. (Having rushed
towards the inner apartment), thou hast not suffered in character. For
the good to behold others’ wives in a friendly spirit, cannot bring on
unrighteousness." Permitted by Tārā, that long-armed repressor of foes,
urged on by (the required) speed, entered the inner apartment. There
seated on a superb seat spread with a costly carpet, he found Sugriva
resembling the sun himself, his person decked with noble ornaments, of a
dignified presence, famous, wearing gay garlands and attire, invincible
like unto the great Indra. And surrounded by dames adorned with elegant
ornaments and wreaths, Sugriva with his eyes still more reddened in
wrath, looked like the Destroyer himself. Then deeply embracing Umā, the
large-eyed hero of the hue of fine gold, seated on an excellent seat,
saw the powerful Saumitri having expansive eyes.

  ¹²⁸ An ornament for their toes or feet.—T.




## SECTION XXXIV.


Seeing that foremost of men, Lakshmana, exercised with wrath, as he
entered in without let, Sugriva was seized with sadness. And seeing
Daçaratha’s son, wroth, and breathing hard, and flaming up in energy,
and burning in consequence of the calamity that had overtaken his
brother, that chief of monkeys started up, leaving his golden seat, like
unto the mighty ornamented standard of the great Indra. And as Sugriva
rose up, Umā and the other females rose up, like unto stars appearing in
the sky when the full moon has risen. And with eyes reddened, and his
hands folded, the graceful Sugriva came (before Lakshmana) and stood
there like a mighty Kalpa tree. And the wrathful Lakshmana spake unto
Sugriva stationed among women, having Umā for his second, and resembling
the moon with the stars, saying,—"The king that is nobly endowed by
heredity, and is kind, that hath subdued his senses,and is grateful and
truth-telling, obtains renown in this world. And who is more wicked than
that king who, rooted in unrighteousness, makes false promises unto
friends intent upon his welfare? He that speaks a falsehood with
reference to a horse, becomes guilty of the deaths of an hundred horses:
he committing himself to a falsehood relative to a cow, reapeth the
demerit of slaying a thousand kine; while he that uttereth an untruth
touching a person, destroys self as well as his kindred. That ungrateful
wight that, having at first attained benefit at the hands of his
friends, doth not requite it, is, O lord of monkeys, worthy of being
slain by all creatures. Seeing an ingrate wretch, the wrathful Brahmā
sang the (previous) _sloka_, bowed down unto by all the worlds. Do thou
understand that, O monkey. The pious provide deliverance for the
cow-killer, the wine-biber, the thief, and the violator of vows; but for
the ungrateful person there is no deliverance whatever. Thou art ignoble
and ungrateful and lying, O monkey, since, having been formerly
benefitted by Rāma, thou dost not requite his services. Having been
benefitted by Rāma, thou, anxious to repay his kindness, shouldst exert
thyself in search of Sitā. But, of false promises, thou hast been
indulging in gross enjoyments,—nor doth Rāma know thee for a serpent,
croaking like a frog.¹²⁹ A sinful wretch and of wicked soul, thou hast
obtained the kingdom of the monkeys through the agency of the eminently
virtuous, kind and high-souled Rāma. Thou dost not acknowledge the good
offices rendered unto thee by the high-souled Rāghava; and therefore,
slain by means of sharpened shafts, thou shalt soon see Vāli. The way
that hath been wended by the slain Vāli, is not yet narrowed. Do thou, O
Sugriva, desist in time: do not walk in the wake of Vāli. Do not behold
the shafts resembling thunder-bolts shot from the bow of that best of
the Ikshwākus. Then, attaining happiness, thou shalt pass thy days in
peace. Nor do thou mentally neglect Rāma’s business."

  ¹²⁹ Crying through the voice of the frog in its mouth. Another meaning
      is, "croaking like a frog, to allure frogs to it."—T.




## SECTION XXXV.


When Sumitrā’s son, Lakshmana, had spoken thus, flaming in energy, Tārā
of face fair as the moon, said unto him, "O Lakshmana, thou ought not to
speak thus: and this lord of monkeys does not deserve to hear this harsh
speech from thy lips, in especial. Sugriva is not ungrateful, or
cunning, or heartless; nor doth he, O hero, deal in falsehood; nor is he
deceitful. Nor hath the heroic monkey, O hero, forgotten the good,
incapable of being done by others in battle, that the hero, Rāma, hath
done in his behalf. And, O afflictor of foes, through Rāma’s grace,
Sugriva hath here attained fame and the enduring empire of the monkeys,
as well as Umā and myself. Having lain down miserably before, Sugriva,
now that he hath attained this supreme happiness, doth not heed his
urgent duties, like the ascetic Viçwāmitra. Attached unto Ghritachi, O
Lakshmana, the pious and mighty ascetic, Viçwāmitra looked upon ten
years as one day; and that best of those conversant with time,
Viçwāmitra of mighty energy, did not perceive that the time (for doing a
certain act) had arrived. What is to be said of other people? O
Lakshmana, it behoveth Rāma to forgive one who hath all the bodily
exigencies, who is fatigued, and who is not satisfied with the pleasures
of Kāma. Nor, O Lakshmana, doth it behove thee, without ascertaining the
exact import of things, to become suddenly subject to wrath, like any
inferior person. O chief of men, persons endowed with the quality of
goodness, like unto thee, do not suffer themselves to come under the
sway of passion, without (at first) needfully revolving matters. I crave
thy favor with concentrated mind, thou that knowest morality. Renounce
the mighty grief that springs from thy ire. This is my conviction that
for compassing Rāma’s welfare, Sugriva can resign Umā and myself, and
Angada, and the kingdom and wealth and corn and animals. Slaying that
worst of Rākshasas, Sugriva will bring Rāghava with Sitā, like unto the
moon accompanied by Rohini. Without slaying hundreds, of thousands of
Kotis, and thirty six Ayutas, thousands, and hundreds of irrepressible
Rākshasas wearing shapes at will, (Rāma) can not slay Rāvana, by whom
Maithili hath been carried away. They are incapable, O Lakshmana, of
being slain (by Rāma) in battle, unless he is supported (by others).
Rāvana is a wily warrior, and hence is the special need of Sugriva. That
knowing lord of monkeys, Vāli, had told me all this. I do not know how
Rāvana had secured this host: I say what I had heard from Vāli. For
rendering thee assistance, the foremost monkeys have been despatched in
order to summon to the conflict numerous principal monkeys. Expecting
these powerful and exceedingly strong ones, for attaining Rāghava’s end,
this lord of monkeys doth not (yet) sally out. Things, O Saumitri, have
beforehand been so satisfactorily arranged by Sugriva, that this very
day the mighty one will be joined with all those monkeys. This very day
billions of bears and thousands of _golangulas_ as well as innumerable
Kotis of monkeys flaming in energy shall join thee. Therefore, O subduer
of enemies, banish thy anger. Seeing this thy face wrought up with
wrath, and thy eyes appearing like red sores, the wives of the best of
monkeys experience no peace, and they are agitated by the fear that
exercised them of late."




## SECTION XXXVI.


Humbly addressed in these words informed with morality, Sumitra’s son,
resuming his native mildness, accepted them. On his accepting the
speech, the lord of monkeys like a wet cloth cast off from him the fear
he had conceived on account of Lakshmana. Then Sugriva—lord of monkeys—
tore away the gaudy and variegated garland on his neck— potent with many
a virtue, and became deprived of energy. And that master of all the
monkeys, Sugriva, gladdening Lakshmana of dreadful prowess, humbly
observed unto him, "Thou son unto Sumitra, by the favor of Rāma have I
received back my lost luck, my fame, and this eternal monarchy of the
monkeys. O king’s son, who is capable of repaying even in part an action
like that of the divine (Rāma) renowned by means of his own acts? By
virtue of native energy, and merely with my help, the righteous Rāghava
shall recover Sitā and slay Rāvana to boot. What need of assistance to
him who with a single shaft rived seven giant trees, a mountain, and the
Earth. O Lakshmana, what is the use of help to him the sounds of whose
stretching bow made the Earth tremble with her mountains? O best of men,
when that foremost of men shall set out for slaying his enemy, Rāvana
along with those going before him, I will follow him. If through my
confidence, or presuming upon our amity, I have transgressed in any way,
(Rāma) ought to excuse his servant,—for there is no servant that doth
not transgress." When the high-souled Sugriva had said this, Lakshmana
became well pleased, and he spake from love,—"Having, in especial, thee
endeued with humility, my brother, O monarch of monkeys, is every way
strong, O Sugriva. Such is thy strength, O Sugriva, and such thy
self-denial, that thou art fully worthy to enjoy the good fortune of the
king of monkeys. O Sugriva, by thy help, the puissant Rāma shall
speedily slay his foe. Of this there is not the least doubt. O Sugriva,
what thou, virtuous, grateful and never turning away from fight, hast
said is fit and proper. What knowing person, excepting, O foremost of
monkeys, thyself and my elder brother, can speak so? Resembling Rāma
himself in strength and prowess, thou, O chief of monkeys, hast been
ordained his help by the gods. But, O hero, do thou speedily go out with
me and soothe thy friend aggrieved for the ravishment of his wife. And
do thou, my friend, forgive what rough speech, on hearing the utterances
of Rāma sunk in grief, I have given thee."




## SECTION XXXVII.


Thus addressed by the magnanimous Lakshmana, Sugriva said unto Hanumān,
staying beside him, "Those that dwell on the summits of Mahendra,
Himavat, Vindhya and Kailāça; on Mandara, the peaks of Pāndu and the
five hills; on mountains wearing the hue of the infant sun, and ever
bright; and those inhabiting the West, beyond the sea; on mountains in
the mansions of the sun, looking like the evening sky; and those
dreadful foremost of monkeys that inhabit Padmachala, those monkeys
that, resembling collyrium-like clouds, and having the strength of the
lord of elephants, dwell in the Anjana hill; monkeys, possessing the
splendour of gold, inhabiting the caverns of Mahāçaila; those resorting
to the sides of Meru, as well as those dwelling in the Dhumra mountains;
and those, having the hues of the infant sun, dwelling in the Mahāruna
mountain, drinking the Maireya wine; and those dwelling in mighty fair
and fragrant forests and romantic hermitages all round, lying on the
skirts of woods,—do thou at once bring all these—all the foremost
monkeys of the world, by means of gifts and conciliation, and through
the agency of more than usually fleet monkeys. I know those monkeys that
I have first despatched, to be gifted with great velocity¹³⁰,—yet, for
urging speed upon them, do thou send other foremost of monkeys. Do thou
directly bring up here those monkey-chiefs that are given up to lust or
are dilatory. Those wicked ones, that finding fault with the royal
mandate, do not (come in) at my command within ten days, must be slain.
Let those hundreds and thousands and _kotis_ of leonine monkeys that
abide by my mandate, hie (hence) at my behest. Let (monkeys) resembling
clouds or mountains, cover up the sky; and let the foremost monkeys of
dreadful forms march hence at my command. Let all the monkeys on earth,
acquainted with motion, hying themselves and summoning speed at my
command, bring all the monkeys." Hearing the words of the monkey-king,
the son of the Wind-god despatched powerful monkeys in all directions.
Despatched by the king, the monkeys, ranging the sphere of birds and
stars, immediately went through the welkin. And on oceans and mountains,
in forests and tanks, the monkeys began to send away all the apes on
behalf of Rāma. Hearing the mandate of that king of kings, Sugriva,
resembling the Hour of death, the monkeys, conceiving fear for Sugriva,
set out. And monkeys resembling collyrium (in hue), numbering three
_kotis_, endeued with huge might, set out from the Anjana hill for the
place where Rāghava was. And ten _kotis_ having the splendour of molten
gold, inhabiting the mountain where the sun sets, set out. And a
thousand _kotis_, hued like the lion’s mane, came from the peaks of
Kailāça. And of those dwelling in Himalaya, subsisting on fruits and
roots, numbering a thousand and _kotis_, a thousand appeared. And
thousands of dreadful monkeys of terrible deeds, hued like charcoal,
numbering _kotis_, rushed suddenly from Vindhya. And there exists no
record of the number of those inhabiting the shores of the ocean of
milk, and the dwellers in the Tamāla forests, as well as those
subsisting on cocoanuts. And, as if drinking up the sun, the mighty
monkey host came from forests and caves and rivers. And it came to pass
that those heroic monkeys that had gone away to spur others on, found a
mighty tree on Himavat. On that sacred mount in days of yore there took
place a pleasing Māheçwara¹³¹ sacrifice. There the monkeys found
grateful fruits and roots sprung from the streams of sacrificial
oblations, and resembling ambrosia. He that partakes of those excellent
fruits and roots sprung from the sacrificial ingredients, doth not
experience hunger for a month. Those prime monkeys, feeding on fruits,
gathered those sapid fruits and roots and medicinal herbs. And for
compassing the good of Sugriva, repairing thither, the monkeys brought
ordorous blossoms from the sacrificial ground. And all those foremost of
monkeys, taking all the monkeys of the earth, hastily set off in the van
of the herds. And in a short while, those fast-fleeting apes speedily
reached Kishkindhā, where the monkey Sugriva was. And taking the healing
herbs and the fruits and roots, the monkeys made them over to Sugriva,
and said, "Having traversed mountains, rivers and forests, all the
monkeys of the earth bend their steps towards thee in obedience to thy
command." Hearing this, Sugriva—lord of monkeys—was well pleased, and
with a glad heart accepted all those presents.

  ¹³⁰ The commentator slips the sense here. According to him, the
      meaning is, _Those monkeys whom I have first sent, are known to
      me.—T._

  ¹³¹ The celestial horse-sacrifice.—T.




## SECTION XXXVIII.


Having accepted all those presents, (Sugriva), after soothing the
monkeys, dismissed them. Having dismissed the thousands of apes, who had
performed their task, he deemed himself as well as the mighty Rāghava as
having secured success. Then Lakshmana in sweet words spoke unto the
exceedingly strong chief of monkeys—Sugriva— gladdening him, "If it
please thee, O placid one, I will go out of Kishkindhā." Hearing
Lakshmana’s soft speech, Sugriva, highly delighted, said, "Be it so. Let
us go. I abide by thy behest." Having said this unto Lakshmana of
auspicious marks, Sugriva dismissed the women with Tārā at their head.
Then Sugriva in a loud voice summoned the foremost monkeys, saying,
"Come (hither)." Hearing his words, those monkeys that could present
themselves before the females, did so with joined hands. To them, who
had presented themselves, said the king, of splendour resembling that of
the Sun, "Do, ye monkeys, bring hither a car." bearing his words,
monkeys uniting vigor with celerity, brought a car lovely to behold.
Seeing the car brought up, the lord of monkeys said unto Sumitra’s son,
"O Lakshmana, ascend speedily." Having said this, Sugriva in company
with Lakshmana swiftly ascended the golden car resembling the sun, yoked
with numerous steeds. With a pale umbrella held over his head, and white
chowris waving around, with conchs and trumpets blowing, eulogized by
bards, Sugriva marched out, having obtained supreme regal
auspiciousness. And surrounded by hundreds of high-spirited apes and
armed people, he proceeded whither Rāma was staying.— And having arrived
at the excellent spot which was the home of Rāma, that highly energetic
one alighted from the car along with Lakshmana. And having come to Rāma,
Sugriva (stood) folding his hands. And when Sugriva had folded his
hands, the monkeys also did so. And beholding the mighty host of the
monkeys resembling a tank filled with lotus buds, Rāma was well-pleased
with Sugriva. And raising up the monkey-king who had bent his head at
Rāma’s feet, Rāghava embraced him from love and regard. Having embraced
Sugriva, that righteous one said unto him, "Be seated." And seeing
Sugriva seated on the ground, Rāma said, "He, O best of monkeys, is a
king who, O hero, in season follows righteousness, pleasure and profit,
always dividing the same (among all.) He that, renouncing righteousness
and the good, devotes himself to pleasure solely, is like a man that
falling asleep on the top of a tree, wakes when he hath fallen down.
That king is verily virtuous that, engaged in uprooting foes and
advancing friends, attends to all the three ends. O destroyer of foes,
the time is come for exertion: do thou, O lord of monkeys, bethink
thyself along with thy monkey ministers." Thus addressed, Sugriva said
unto Rāma, "O mighty-armed one, my lost luck, and repute, and the entire
monkey kingdom I have received back through thy gift, owing to thine and
thy brother’s grace, thou foremost of victors. He that, having received
a good office, doth not requite it, reapeth obloquy among persons. These
hundreds of prime monkeys. O destroyer of enemies, have come here,
bringing with them all the monkeys of the world. O Rāghava, bears and
monkeys, heroic Golāngulas—acquainted with woods and forests and
strongholds, and of terrible shapes—and monkeys who are the sons of
deities, wearing forms at will—stay on the way, O Rāghava, surrounded by
their own armies. And, O hero, O repressor of foes, monkeys surrounded
by hundreds, and hundred thousands, and _kotis_, and _ayutas_, and
_sankus_,¹³² and _arvudas_, and hundreds of _arvudas_, and _madhyas_,
and _antyas_, wait (here). And _samudras_, and _parārdhas_ of
monkeys—leaders of herds—inhabiting Meru and Vindhya, resembling clouds
or hills, and in might resembling the great India, are on their way unto
thee, O king. They will join thee for battling the fiend in the field;
and, slaying Rāvana in fight, shall bring Mithilā’s daughter."

Thereat the puissant son of the Earth’s lord, witnessing the
preparations made by the heroic monkey, remaining under his command,
appeared like a blown blue lotus.

  ¹³² A _Sanku_ is a thousand _Arvudas_; a _Madhya_ is an _Arvuda_ ten
      times; an _Antya_ is a _Madhya_ ten times; a _Samudra_ is a
      _Madhya_ twenty times; and a _Parārdha_, a _Samudra_ thirty
      times.—T.




## SECTION XXXIX.


As Sugriva was speaking thus with joined hands, that best of the
righteous, Rāma, embraced him with his arms, and then replied, "That
Indra poureth down showers, is no wonder, nor that this thousand-rayed
Sun dispells darkness from the sky; nor yet that, O mild one, the Moon
by his rays causes the clear night. (And in a similar way), friends like
thee bring delight, O subduer of foes. O mild one, that whatever is
graceful, should be harboured in thee is not strange.¹³³ I know, O
Sugriva, that thou always speakst what is for my good. Assisted by thee,
my friend, I shall in battle vanquish all my foes. Thou being my friend
and my ally, shouldst assist me. That worst of Rākshasas hath carried
away Maithili, to bring down destruction upon himself, even as Anuhlāda
ravished Puloma’s daughter, Sachi, deceiving her sire. That Rāvana I
will at no distant date slay with my sharpened shafts, even as that
slayer of enemies, he of an hundred sacrifices—slew the haughty father
of Paulomi." Presently appeared volumes of dust, and the hot and fierce
rays of the sun were hid in the sky. And darkened by the gloom, all
sides became bewildered. And the entire earth with her mountains,
forests, and woods, trembled. Then the whole ground was covered with
innumerable monkeys gifted with great strength, and having sharp teeth,
and resembling kings of men. Then surrounded by leaders of monkey-herds
and retinues numbering hundreds of _kotis_, and monkey chiefs from
rivers, and mountains, and seas, endowed with prodigious strength, and
other apes inhabiting forests, having voices resembling clouds—and
monkeys hued like the infant sun, or white like the moon, or colored
like the filaments of the lotus, or pale, having their homes in the
Golden mountain—in all, numbering ten thousand _kotis_,—appeared the
graceful and heroic monkey, named Satavali. Then, having the splendour
of the Golden hill, the puissant sire of Tārā was seen at the head of
many thousand _kotis_. Then Uma’s father, that lord, the father-in-law
of Sugriva, arrived, accompanied with other thousands of _kotis_ (of
monkeys),—resembling the filaments of the lotus, of face like unto the
youthful sun, intelligent, the foremost of monkeys—supreme among them
all. And Hanumān’s father, the graceful Keçarin, appeared in company
with many thousands of monkeys. And Gavaksha—sovereign of
Golāngulās—endowed with dreadful might, appeared, surrounded by
thousands of _kotis_ of monkeys. And Dhumra of bears endowed with
terrific speed—destroyer of foes—appeared, surrounded by two thousand
_kotis_. And the leader of herds, named Panama, of exceeding prowess,
came, accompanied with three _kotis_, mighty and dreadful. And the
leader of herds, named Nila, of huge body, resembling a mass of blue
collyrium, appeared with ten _kotis_. Then the exceedingly powerful
Gavaya—leader of herds, having the splendour of the Golden mountain,
arrived with five _kotis_. And that powerful leader of herds—Darimukha,
came, surrounded by thousands of _kotis_, and took up his post by
Sugriva. And Mainda and Dwivida—sons of Açwi both—of mighty strength,
appeared with _kotis_ upon thousands of _kotis_ of monkeys. And the
powerful and heroic Gaya (came), surrounded by three _kotis_. And the
king of bears, Jāmbavān by name, (came), surrounded by ten _kotis_, and
enlisted himself under the command of Sugriva. And (the monkey) named
Rumana, possessed of energy, and strong, came swiftly, surrounded by an
hundred _kotis_ of powerful monkeys. Then, followed at his back by
hundreds and thousands of _kotis_, came the monkey, Gandhamādana. Then
came the young prince Angada, in prowess resembling his
sire,—accompanied by a thousand _padmas_ and an hundred _sankhas_. Then
appeared at a distance, accompanied by five _kotis_ of monkeys endowed
with dreadful prowess,—Tāra, having the splendour of a star. And then
appeared Indrajanu, the heroic monkey and leader of herds—lord of eleven
_kotis_—surrounded by them. Then followed Rambha, resembling the infant
sun, accompanied by an _ayuta_, a thousand, and an hundred. Then
appeared to the view the stout monkey, named Durmukha, heroic lord of
herds, surrounded by two _kotis_. And Hanumān showed himself, surrounded
by a thousand _kotis_ of monkeys, resembling peaks of Kailaça, of
dreadful vigor. And the exceedingly energetic Nala came, attended with
an hundred _kotis_, a thousand, and an hundred monkeys, living in trees.
Then surrounded by ten _kotis_ (of monkeys), came the shapely Darimukha
before the high-souled Sugriva, from a country bordering on a river. And
Sarabha, Kumuda, Vahni, the monkey Rambha,—and many other monkeys—lords
of herds—passing ennumeration—wearing shapes at will, came, covering the
entire earth with her mountains and forests. And all the monkeys of the
world were some of them coming and others putting up. And monkeys— some
of them dripping, and some leaping, and some roaring—gathered round
Sugriva, like clouds gathering round the sun. And, crying in various
tones, prime monkeys furnished with arms, with bent heads spoke humbly
to that lord of monkeys—Sugriva. And other foremost of monkeys,
gathering together duly, came before Sugriva with joined hands. Sugriva
standing with joined hands, expeditiously informed Rāma of the arrival
of the monkey-leaders in hot haste; and then spake (to them), saying, "O
chiefs of monkeys, stationing the forces duly near mountain-rills and
all the woods, let him that is conversant with the army, ascertain who
have come and who have not."

  ¹³³ The commentator in his usual way of reading between the lines,
      says that the sense is—_That thou hast gathered forces for serving
      thy friend, is not strange. O placid one, it is well._ I give the
      sense the _sloka_ naturally yields.—T.




## SECTION XL.


Xhen that lord of monkeys, the successful Sugriva, spake unto Rāma—lion
among men and destroyer of hostile hosts— saying, "Those foremost
monkeys endeued with strength and capable of wearing any shape at will,
and possessed of the splendour of the mighty Indra,—that inhabit my
territories, have come and stationed themselves. And these monkeys—
dreadful, and resembling Daityas and Dānavas—are accompanied by powerful
monkeys of terrific prowess, who have displayed their virtue in many a
field,—and are of famed renown in battle and, powerful, and who have
mastered languor and are celebrated in prowess and sterling in their
profession. O Rāma, these _kotis_ of apes that have arrived, inhabiting
earth and water and various mountainous tracts, are at thy service. All
abide by thy command—all are intent upon the welfare of their master,
and, O subduer of foes, they are competent to bring about thy end. And
in company with many thousands and innumerable ones that have shewn
their ability in many a field, have come monkeys dreadful, and
resembling Daityas and Dānavas. If, O lion among men, thou conceive that
the time is ripe, tell it (unto me). It behoves thee to command those
forces, remaining under thy sway. Although I am full well acquainted
with the work in which they are to be employed, yet thou ought to order
them as to what they are to accomplish." When Sugriva had spoken thus,
Daçaratha’s son, Rāma, embracing him with his arms, said, "O placid one,
do thou learn whether Videha’s daughter is alive or not; as well as
ascertain the country, where, O thou endowed with eminent wisdom, liveth
Rāvana. Having come at Vaidehi and Rāvana’s abode, shall I then appoint
the time along with thee. O lord of monkeys, I am not the master in this
matter, nor Lakshmana: thou art the cause of this undertaking, as well
as, O monarch of monkeys, the lord. Do thou therefore, O lord, command
these as to what is to be done by them in my behalf. O hero, thou
certainly knowest my business. My second friend (Lakshmana being first),
thou art potent, wise, conversant with seasonableness, cognizant of
profit, and engaged in our welfare." Thus addressed, Sugriva in presence
of Rāma and the intelligent Lakshmana, said unto a leader of herds and
lord of apes, named Vinatā, having the splendour of a hill, blazing and
emitting sounds as those of clouds, "O foremost of monkeys, accompanied
with apes resembling the sun and the moon, thou cognizant of time, place
and morals, and sagacious in deciding course of action,—surrounded by
hundreds and thousands of active apes, march towards the Eastern
quarter, furnished with woods, forests and hills. There, in mountain
fastnesses, and forests and rivers, do thou search Videha’s daughter,
Sitā, as well as the abode of Rāvana. And while on the search around for
Rāma’s beloved wife, Sitā, daughter-in-law unto Daçaratha, thou shouldst
search the beautiful Bhāgirathi, and the Sarayu, and the Kauçiki; the
Kalindi, and the charming Yamunā, and the mighty hill bordering thereon;
and the Saraswati, and the Sindhu, and the Sona with water resembling
ruby; and the Mahi and Kālamahi, garnished with woods and hills,—the
large tracts—Brahmamālas, Videhas, and Mālavans, and Kāçikosalas, and
Māgadhas, and Pundras, and Angas; and grounds native to silkworms, and
containing mines of silver; and mountains and cities embosmed in the
sea. Do thou also search through the houses in Mandara, —belonging to
people having ears resembling cloths, reaching their nether lips, and
mouths resembling iron, —one-footed and fleet withal; and whose
descendants never deteriorate;—and to anthropophagi; and hunters
dwelling on islands; having sharp hair, gold-hued, pleasing, and
subsisting on raw fish; and to creatures—tiger-man forms—terrible to
behold; and, ye dwellers of woods, do ye carefully search those places
that are accessible by crags and bounds,—and the island of Yava, adorned
by seven several kingdoms, and the island of Suvarna, and
Rupayaka,—thronged by gold miners. And, going beyond the island of Yava,
(one comes upon) the hill called Sisira, which pierceth the heavens by
its peaks, and is inhabited by gods and demons. In all these mountain
fastnesses, cascades and woods, do ye together search for the renowned
wife of Rāma. Then, arriving at the rapid red waters going under the
name of Sona,and repairing to the other shore of the ocean, the abode of
Siddhas and Charanas, do ye search all round for Rāvana in company with
Sitā in the sweet sacred spots and picturesque woods. And ye should
explore forests, mountain-sprung streams, wild tracts subject to storms,
and mountains containing caverns. Then it behoves you to examine
horrible ocean islands, heaving with waves, terrific, resounding,—of
haughty bearing in consequence of winds. There, huge-bodied Asuras,
hungering for a long period, permitted by Brahma, capture creatures,
resorting to shades. And adroitly arriving at that great sea, like unto
clouds at the universal dissolution, inhabited by mighty snakes, sending
loud sounds,—and there, after passing the terrific sea of red waters
called Yellow, ye will behold a mighty knarled Sālmali, There, built by
Viçwakarman, peak-like, gigantic, resembling Kailaça, (towereth) the
mansion of Vinatā’s offspring, named Mandeha. There, grim Rākshasas
named Mandehas, resembling hills, of diverse shapes, capable of
inspiring fear, hang head foremost on the rocks. Day after day at
sunrise, these Rākshasas heated (by solar rays) and struck dead by
Brahma energy,¹³⁴ again and again (hang on the crags). Then wilt thou, O
thou that art hard to repress, proceeding, view the sea named Kshiroda,
having the hue of pale clouds, and looking like a necklace, because of
the ripples (on its surface). In it there are the mighty white mountains
going by the name of Rishada, covered with trees bearing oderous
blossoms; as well as the tank known under the name of Sudarçana,
swarming with swans and shining silver lotuses having golden filaments.
Desirous of sport, resort to this tank delighted troops of Vivudhas and
Chāranas, Yakshas, Kinnaras and Apsarās. Leaving behind Kshiroda, ye
monkeys, ye will soon after behold the Jalada sea, striking terror into
all beings. There presideth that mighty ire-born Energy of him,¹³⁵
(embodied in) the mouth of a mule. This wondrous (universe) containing
mobile and immobile things and fraught with great impetus, is the
aliment of this Energy. There are heard the cries of feeble creatures
inhabiting the sea, who began to wail on witnessing the mouth of the
mule. On the north of the Swādu sea, lie thirteen _yojanas_ (of land),
named Jātarupaçila,¹³⁶ exceeding spacious, and of the splendour of gold.
There, ye monkeys, ye will behold that serpent, the holder of
Earth—resembling the moon, and with expansive eyes like
lotus-petals—seated at the summit of the mount,— that one worshipped of
all deities, having a thousand heads,— the god Ananta, clad in blue
apparel. And by the dais (there) at the top of the mount is the golden
palm, planted by that high souled one,—which is like a banner. The chief
of the celestials reared it in the Eastern region. After that is the
fair Rising mountain. Its golden peak measuring a hundred _yojanas_,
reaching unto the heavens, rises nobly, with mountains at its base; and
looks beautiful with Sālas, palms, Tamālas, and flowering
Karnikāras,—golden, splendid and resembling the sun. There,¹³⁷ spreading
a _yojana_ around, towering up ten, is the peak named Saumanasa—all
certainly of gold. There, formerly on the occasion of invading the earth
with three paces, that foremost of persons, Vishnu, planting his first
foot, planted the other on the summit of Meru. The sun, having passed by
Jamvudwipa on the north, and, arriving at that mighty and eminent
summit, (Saumanasa), again becometh visible to the dwellers of
Jamvudwipa. There are seen those Vālakhilya Maharshis, named
Vaikhānasas,—wearing the hue of the sun, leading an ascetic mode of
life. This is the island of Sudarçana, before which all creatures
inspire energy and have their sight granted to them. You should search
for Rāvana with Vaidehi all round the top of that mountain as well as in
its forests and woods. (Here) the first twilight enfolded in the glory
of the golden hill and that of the high-souled Sun, appeareth roseate.
As this is the first gateway of both Earth and Heaven, and as the sun
first rises in this quarter, this is called the East. Ye should search
the breast of its mountain, and fountains, and caves for Rāvana in
company with Vaidehi. Beyond that, is the exceedingly impassable Eastern
quarter, thronged by the celestials,—covered with darkness and devoid of
the sun and the moon. Do ye search for Jānaki in all those rocks, woods
and streams as well as in such spots as I have not mentioned. Ye
foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are competent to proceed thus far.
Beyond this, of the tract without sun and without limit, I know nothing.
Meeting with Vaidehi and (arriving at) Rāvana’s mansion, do ye, having
reached the Rising hill, turn back, when it shall be a full month. Do
not stay longer than a month. If ye do, ye shall be slain by me. Having
attained your end, do ye turn back, having met with Maithili. Having
adroitly explored (the tract) loved of Mahendra, plated with woods, do
ye, ye monkeys, having come at Sitā—the beloved wife of that descendant
of Raghu—desist, attaining happiness."

  ¹³⁴ The commentator explains: _energy darted from the three
      orders.—T._

  ¹³⁵ Sage Aurvi.—T.

  ¹³⁶ Lit. _of gold and stone.—T._

  ¹³⁷ The commentator says that this locative refers to the summit of
      the Rising hill.—T.




## SECTION XLI.


Then having sent away that mighty host of monkeys, Sugriva despatched to
the South others competent to perform tlie several tasks entrusted to
them. And appointing the exceedingly mighty Angada as the leader of
those heroic monkeys, that hero, the lord of monkey bands, conversant
with the countries intended to be explored, despatched heroes endowed
with speed and prowess, headed by Angada, Nila the son of Fire, and the
monkey Hanumān, and the exceedingly energetic Jambavān, son unto the
Great-father, and Suhotra, and Sarāri, and Saragulma, Gaya, Gavākshya,
and Gavaya, Sushena, Vrishabha, Mainda, Dwivida, and Gandhamādana, and
Ulkāmukha and Ananga—sons of Fire both. And the lord of monkeys began to
describe unto the monkey-chiefs those tracts in those directions, that
were difficult of access. "Ye will behold Vindhya having an hundred
summits, and brushed with various trees and shrubs, and the romantic
river Narmada, frequented by mighty serpents; and the Godāvari,¹³⁸ and
that mighty river, the captivating Krishnaveni, and the Mekhalas and
Utkalas, and the cities of Daçārna; and Avravanti and Avanti, and the
Vidarbhas and Nishtikas and the charming Māhishakas.¹³⁹ And ye will see
also the Matsyas and Kalingas and Kauçikas all round, and the forest of
Dandaka, with mountains, rivers and caverns; and the river Godāvari,¹⁴⁰
and the Andhras, and Paundras, the Cholas, the Pandyas, and the Keralas.
Then shall ye repair to the mountain Ayomukha,¹⁴¹ plated with ore,
having taking summits, graceful, furnished with picturesque flowering
woods,— the mighty mountain having groves of excellent sandal. At the
foot of the Malaya mountain endeued with exceeding energy, ye will
behold the noble stream Kāveri, of pleasant waters, where sport troops
of Apsarās. (There) you will see that foremost of saints, Agastya,
resembling the sun. Permitted by that gratified high-souled one, ye will
cross over the great river, Tāmraparni, abounding in alligators. Like a
youthful female in relation to her lover, she (Tāmraparni), with both
her waters as well as islets concealed under beautiful sandal woods,
bathes in the sea. Proceeding (therefrom), the monkeys shall see the
grand golden gates belonging to the walls of the capital of the Pāndyas.
Then arriving at the main, ye shall ascertain your ability or otherwise
of crossing the same. In the bosom of the deep there, Agastya hath
placed that foremost of mountains—the charming Mahendra, having
picturesque plateaus; golden, and beautiful,—with a portion of it sunk
in the great ocean. For aye, He of a thousand eyes at _Parvas_ visiteth
this mountain embellished by various blossoming trees and creepers;
beauteous with divinities, and saints, and the foremost Yakshas and
Apsarās; thronged by numbers of Siddhas and Charanas; and of surpassing
loveliness. On its other shore is an island extending over an hundred
_yojanas_, inaccessible to men¹⁴² and of splendid aspect. Do ye explore
it all round. There, in particular, ye must every way search for Sitā.
That country belongs to the impious Rāvana, worthy of being slain—the
lord of Rākshasas, like unto the thousand-eyed (deity) in splendour. In
the midst of the Southern sea belonging to him (Rāvana), there is a
Rākshasi, named Angā, who procureth her prey by casting her shadow.
Having (by your search) satisfied yourselves as to those countries where
ye might suspect Sitā to be, do ye, your doubts dispelled, proceeding
beyond that, (Lankā), search for the spouse of that monarch endeued with
unbounded energy. In the sea extending over an hundred _yojanas_, a
lovely hill, named Pushpitaka, the abode of Siddhas and Chāranas;
resembling the rays of the sun or the moon,— resting on the waters of
the ocean, looks splendid, piercing the heavens with its giant peaks. Of
this (mountain), there is a particular golden summit, which the sun
approaches. It is incapable of being beheld by the ungrateful or the
atheistical. Bowing your heads down unto this hill, let the monkeys
search on. Leaving behind that irrepressible one, (ye will come upon) a
mountain difficult of approach, extending over fourteen _yojanas_, named
Suryyavān. Passing by that also, (ye will see) a mountain, named Vidyut,
filled with trees, beautiful at all seasons, and bearing all desirable
fruits. There, feeding upon excellent and costly fruits and roots, and
drinking delicious honey, let the monkeys pass beyond it. There is the
hill named Kunjara, grateful both to the eye and the mind,—where
Viçwakarmā had built the abode of Agastya.¹⁴³ There (rises) that stately
golden pile, adorned with various gems, extending over one _yojana_, and
ten in height. In it¹⁴⁴ also there is that palace, which is the abode of
snakes; having spacious ways, incapable of being captured, guarded
around, and protected by dreadful snakes and sharp-toothed serpents of
virulent poison; where dwelleth Vāsuki, the exceedingly terrible king of
snakes. Proceeding heedfully, ye must explore that Bhogavati palace; as
also whatever concealed places may lie there. Going beyond that place,
(ye will see) the mighty mountain named Rhrishava, in the form of a
bull, full of all gems, and possessed of grace,— where are produced
excellent _Goçirshaka_, _Padmaka_, and _Haricyāma_ sandals, and which in
effulgence resembles fire. But, seeing that sandal, ye must by no means
ask any questions: certain Gandharbas, named Rohitas, are on guard over
that wood—the lords of Gandharbas, in splendour like unto five
suns,—Cailusha, Grāmani, Ciksha, Cuka, and Babhru. After that,
(Rhishava), at the extremity of the Earth is the abode of persons of
pious acts, whose bodies are composed of the Sun, the Moon and Fire. And
there reside persons who have won the heavenly regions. After that are
the awful regions of the ancestral manes, which ye must not approach.
This is the metropolis of Yama, covered by deep gloom. Ye heroic monkey
chiefs, ye can seek thus far. Further there is no course for those
endeued with motion. Having examined all these, as well others that may
come within your ken, it behoves you, after having ascertained Vaidehi’s
course, to return (hither). He that, returning within a month, shall
say,—"I have seen Sitā," shall pass his days in happiness, enjoying
affluence like mine own and indulging all pleasures. He shall be dearer
unto me than life itself, and none dearer (unto me) than he; and
although he might commit innumerable wrongs, still should he become my
friend. Possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, and sprung from
lines crowned with sterling virtues, do ye strive manfully in such a
glorious way that the king’s daughter may be recovered."

  ¹³⁸ The commentator says, "The Godāvari flowing through the countries
      to the east of the Vindya mountains."—T.

  ¹³⁹ Some texts read—Rishtikas instead.—T.

  ¹⁴⁰ The tract, according to Rāmanuja, watered by the Godāvari in the
      vicinity of Dandaka.—T.

  ¹⁴¹ Another name of this hill is Malaya.—T.

  ¹⁴² "Because," says the commentator, "of the profusion of gold in
      it."—T.

  ¹⁴³ _i. e. in that hill._

  ¹⁴⁴ _i. e. in that hill._




## SECTION XLII.


Having despatched those monkeys in a southern direction, Sugriva spoke
unto the monkey named Sushena, resembling a mass of clouds. Approaching
his father-in-law, Tārā’s father, possessed of dreadful prowess, the
king, bowing and with joined hands, spoke unto him. And Sugriva
commanded the Maharshi’s son, Māricha, and the mighty ape, Archishmat,
surrounded hy the heroic foremost of monkeys,— possessing the splendour
of Mahendra, gifted with sense and vigor; and resembling the offspring
himself of Vinatā in brightness; and Marichi’s son,—the Mārichas—the
mighty Archirmālyas,—all these sons of the saint¹⁴⁵ —(to march) towards
the West, saying,—"Ye monkey-chiefs, let twice hundred thousand monkeys
led by Sushena (set out) to search Vaidehi. Ye foremost of monkeys, do
ye explore the Saurāshtras, the Bāhlikas, the Chandrachitras, and
(other) populous and fair provinces and spacious cities, and Kukshi,
dense with _Punnāgas_,¹⁴⁶ and filled with _Vakulas_ and _Uddalakas_; as
well as the tracts covered with _Ketaka_ trees; and auspicious streams
bearing their cool waters westward; and the forests of ascetics; and
mountains embosoming woods. There having explored tracts resembling
deserts, and cold cliffs towering high, and the West, covered with
mountain ranges, and extremely difficult of access,—and proceeding at a
little more to the west, it behoves you to have a view of the sea. And
proceeding on, ye monkeys, ye shall see (the ocean), whose waters abound
in whales and alligators, ye monkeys.¹⁴⁷ Then the apes shall sport in
tracts covered by _Ketakas_, and dense with _Tomālas_ and woods of
cocoanuts. There shall ye look for Sitā and the mansion of Rāvana, in
hills and woods on the shores of the sea; and (explore) Murachipattana,
and the delightful Jatāpura, and Avanti, and Angalapā, as well as in the
wood (called) Alakshita, and spacious monarchies, and emporiums. There
is a mighty mountain where the Sindhu falls into the sea, Somagiri by
name; having an hundred summits and tall trees. In its plateaus there
are certain birds (called) Sinhas. These lift up to their nests whales
and elephants. The proud elephants carried to the nests and remaining on
the summits of the mountain, possessing the roar of clouds,having been
gratified (with food), range around this extensive table-land filled
with water. The monkeys, capable of wearing shapes at will, should
swiftly search its golden summit towering to the sky and filled with
graceful trees. Proceeding further, the monkeys shall behold the golden
summit of Pāriyātra rising from the sea and extending over an hundred
_yojanas_. There dwell all around in a body four and twenty _kotis_ of
ascetic Gandharbas, resembling fire, dreadful, practicising impiety, and
like unto flames of fire. The monkeys of dreadful prowess should not
present themselves before those, nor should they take any fruits from
that country. Those heroes are hard to approach; and they are truthful
and possessed of great might. And there they of dreadful prowess stow
away their fruits and roots. There ye should needfully search for
Jānaki. Ye have no fear whatever from them; do ye only follow your
native nature as monkeys. There, in hue like lapises, abounding in
various kinds of trees and plants, is a mighty hill of an adamantine
basis, called Vajra; beautiful, famous, and measuring an hundred
_yojanas_ in height and area. There let the monkeys carefully explore
the caves. On the fourth side of the Ocean is a mountain named
Chakravān. There Viçwakarmā forged the discus (called) _Sahasrāra_.
There, slaying Panchajana and the Dānava, Hayagriva,¹⁴⁸ the Best of male
beings obtained the discus as well as the conch. In those beautiful
plateaus and huge caves, ye should everywhere search for Rāvana with
Videha’s daughter. Sunk in the depths of the sea, is a very great
mountain named Varāha, having golden peaks and measuring four and sixty
_yojanas._ In it is a city named Prāgjyotisha, all of gold. There dwells
the wicked Dānava named Naraka.¹⁴⁹ There do ye everywhere search for
Rāvana along with Vaidehi in the beautiful plateaus and huge caves.
Passing beyond that foremost of mountains, whose sight betrays the
secret of its bowels being freighted with gold, (ye shall come upon) the
mountain Sarvasauvarna, furnished with fountains and cascades. Coming to
it, elephants, and boars, and lions, and tigers, on all sides roar
ceaselessly, wrought up by the echoes their own cries have produced.
This is the mountain named Megha, where the graceful green-horsed
vanquisher of Pāka, Mahendra, was installed king by the gods. Having
passed by that mountain protected by Mahendra, ye shall repair to sixty
thousand hills of gold; in hue like the infant sun, and blazing on all
sides and embellished by blossoming golden trees. In the midst of them
is established as king, Meru, best of mountains. Formerly the Sun being
well pleased, conferred a boon on this mountain, and he addressed the
mountain, saying,—’By my grace all the hills that are under thy
protection, shall be golden day and night; and also those gods
Gandharbas and Dānavas that shall dwell in thee, shall be filled with
reverence for me and to the boot attain a golden glory.’ Coming to the
excellent mountain Meru, Viçwadevas, the Vasus, the Maruts and the
celestials, adore the Sun in the western twilight. Adored by them, the
Sun, becoming invisible, repaireth to the Setting hill.¹⁵⁰ In half a
_muhurta_, the Sun swiftly passes over this (mountain), measuring, as it
does, ten thousand _yojanas_. On its peak rises an edifice; resembling
the sun (in splendour); consisting of palatial mansions built by
Viçwakarmā; and graced by goodly trees rife with various birds,—the
residence of the high-souled Varuna, bearing the noose in his hand.
Between Meru and the Setting hill, towers a tall palm having ten heads.
Golden and graceful, it shineth on a variegated dais. In all these,
difficult of access, as also in rivers and tanks, ye should thoroughly
search for Rāvana along with Vaidehi. There dwells there the righteous
and famous Merusāvarni, sanctified by virtue of his own asceticism, and
like unto Brahmā, himself.¹⁵¹ Bowing down your heads to the earth, ye
should ask the Maharshi Merusāvarni, resembling the sun, touching
Mithilā’s daughter. On the departure of night, the sun dispells the
darkness of the world to this extent, and then enters the Setting hill.
Ye foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are able to proceed thus far. Beyond
this, of what is sunless and boundless I know nothing. Having come to
Vaidehi and Rāvana’s mansions, and arrived at the Setting-hill, do ye
return on the month being complete. Ye must not stay above a month; and
if ye do, ye must be slain by me. And along with you goeth that hero, my
father-in-law. Ye, abiding by his orders, should listen to all that he
sayeth. My mighty-armed father- in-law. gifted with great strength, is
my spiritual preceptor. All of you possessed of prowess, yourselves
certainly constitute the measure whereby to ascertain the wisdom or
otherwise of a course. Making this one also into a measure, survey the
western quarter. Having requited the good that hath been done to us, we
shall attain our end. De ye also determine what else is agreeable (unto
Rāma), and in consonance with place, season and profit, should be
performed by you in the matter of this business." Then those monkeys—
the monkey chiefs headed by Sushena, having heard Sugriva’s deft speech,
set out for the quarter protected by Varuna.

  ¹⁴⁵ Marichi.—T.

  ¹⁴⁶ _Rottleria Tinctoria.—T._

  ¹⁴⁷ The grammar of these slokas is exceedingly vicious; and it has
      cost the Translator no small amount of labor to assign the
      necessary logical _nexus_ in a good many places.—T.

  ¹⁴⁸ Lit. _horse-necked.—T._

  ¹⁴⁹ _i.e. in the Varāha hill.—T._

  ¹⁵⁰ The commentator remarks: "Although not expressly stated, it is
      implied that the islands to the west of it are also to be
      searched."—T.

  ¹⁵¹ Like unto Prajapati dwelling by Mahāmeru.—T.




## SECTION XLIII.


Having directed his father-in-law to proceed to the West, that best of
monkeys, the all-knowing king Sugriva, lord of apes, then spake unto the
heroic monkey, named Satavala, words fraught with good unto himself as
well as unto Rāma,—"Surrounded by hundreds and thousands of rangers of
the forest like thyself, in company with the offspring of Yama as well
as the counsellors in a body, do thou, O thou possessed of prowess,
entering the northern quarter furnished with the Hima çaila, search
everywhere for the illustrious spouse of Rāma.—Having performed this
task satisfactorily, and brought about what is dear unto Daçaratha’s
son, we shall, O best of those that achieve success, be freed from our
debts. The high-souled Rāghava hath done us good. If we can serve him in
turn, our life shall be crowned with success. Even the life of him that
accomplishes the work of one to whom the former is not obliged, is
successful,—what then is to be said in respect of him that hath served
one formerly? Pondering this, those that are engaged in our welfare,
should so act that Jānaki may be discovered. And this formemost of men
is worthy of being honored by all creatures; and Rāma—captor of hostile
capitals—hath also found delight in us. Endowed with sense and prowess,
do ye explore these many inaccessible places, rivers and mountains.
Having searched there Mlechahhas, Pulindas, Surasenas, Prasthalas,
Bharatas, Kurus, and Madrakas, and Varadas, as well as the cities of
Kāmbojas, Yavanas and Sakas, do ye explore Himavān. And in tracts of
Lodhras and Padmakas, and in Devadāru woods¹⁵² do ye search thoroughly
for Rāvana along with Videha’s daughter. Then, coming upon the hermitage
of Soma, frequented by gods and Gandharbas, do ye repair to the mountain
called Kāla possessing spacious plateaus. In those mighty mountains, as
also in others and in their caves, do ye search for that exalted lady,
the blameless wife of Rāma. Having passed beyond that mighty mountain
containing gold in its womb, it behoves you to go to the mountain called
Sudarçana. Then (lies) the mountain called Devasakhā, the home of
feathered tribes; abounding in various fowls,and embellished with
diverse trees. In its golden tracts, fountains and caves, do ye search
for Rāvana along with Videha’s daughter. Going beyond it, (ye come upon)
a vacant land, measuring an hundred _Yojanas_, without mountains, or
rivers, or trees; and void of all living beings. Speedily passing that
desert land capable of making one’s hair stand on end, ye shall feel
delighted, on coming to the pale Kailāça. There (ye will behold) the
charming mansion of Kuvera,resembling pale clouds, of burnished gold,
built by Viçwakarma; where (lies) the spacious tank overflowing with
lotuses and lilies, thronged with swans and Kārandavas, and frequented
by troops of Apsarās. There king Vaiçravana, the lord of Yakshas, bowed
down unto by all creatures,—the graceful giver of riches—sporteth along
with the Guhyakas. In the offshoots belonging to Kailāça resembling the
moon, as also in their caverns,do ye thoroughly search for Rāvana in
company with Vaidehi. And coming to the Krauncha mountain,ye
shou1d,having your wits about you, enter its inaccessible cavern; for
that is well known as difficult of entrance. There dwell certain
Maharshis, high-souled, of effulgence resembling that of the
sun—complete god-like shapes,—who are sought by the deities themselves.
And ye should thoroughly explore the other caves of Krauncha, its
plateaus and peaks; its passes and sides. (Then is) the treeless
Mānasa—abode of birds—the scene of Kāma’s austerities. Way there is none
for creatures, or for gods, or for Rākshasas. That also must be explored
by you,—that mountain with plains and plateaus. Going beyond Krauncha,
(ye shall see) the mountain, named Maināka. There is the residence of
the Dānava, Maya, reared by himself. Maināka also with its plains,
plateaus and woods must be searched by you. There are all over, the
homes of females with faces resembling those of horses. Going beyond
that part, (ye shall come to) the asylum inhabited by Siddhas; where are
ascetics—Vālakhilyas, Siddhas and Vaikhānasas. Saluting those Siddhas,
who have been cleansed of their sins on account of their asceticism, ye
should in humble guise ask them concerning Sitā. There is the Vaikhānasa
tank filled with golden lotuses; and ranged by graceful cranes of the
hue of the infant sun. Kuvera’s vehicle, the elephant known (by the name
of) Sārvabhauma, ever rangeth that country in company with
she-elephants. Going beyond that expanse of water, (ye come upon) a sky
void of stars, and where the sun and the moon have been put out; and
that land is visible by the rays, as if of the sun, proceeding from (the
persons of) self-luminous, god-like ones, who are reposing there, after
achieving success in austerities. Leaving behind that region, (you come
to) a stream named Sailodā. On its both banks are bamboos named Kichaka.
These take the Siddhas to the other shore and bring them back again.
There (are seen) the northern Kurus, the abode of those that have
acquired religious merit. And there are tanks there with their waters
crowned with golden lotuses. There are rivers by thousands with copious
blue lapis leaves. And the pools here,resembling the tender sun, are
embellished with assemblages of golden red lotuses. And that tract is
every where filled with costly gems, and jewels, and woods of blue
lotuses, having filaments splendid like gold; and with round pearls and
costly jewels. And the rivers there have islets covered with gold; and
are crowded with lovely hills of gold, bright as fire, furnished with
all kinds of precious stones. And the trees there, thronged with birds,
bear flowers and fruits daily; and, charged with savoury juices,
publishing superb perfumes, and of delicious feel, they confer every
wish. Other excellent trees bring forth attires of divers kinds, and
ornaments decked with pearls and lapises,—coveted alike by males and
females¹⁵³. And other excellent trees bear fruits fit to be partaken at
all seasons. And other excellent trees bring forth precious beds dight
with costly jewels and furnished with variegated covers. And other trees
bring forth charming wreaths, and costly drinks, and various kinds of
viands. And females adorned with every accomplishment, and endowed with
youth and beauty, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras, and Siddhas and Nāgas and
Vidyādharas, of blazing splendour, ceaselessly sport there in company
with females. And all of righteous deeds, and all engaged in amorous
disports, and all furnished with desire and profit,—dwell in that place
in association with their females. And there are continually heard there
the sounds of instruments and the voice of song mixed with sweet
hilarous laughter, capable of taking all creatures. No one is depressed
there; nor doth any one there want any desirable object; and day after
day the delightful qualities find their developement there. Passing
beyond that is the Northern ocean. In the bosom (of the deep) is the
mountain named Somagiri, golden and of great dimensions. Albeit without
the sun, yet through the brightness of the Soma mountain, tbe land
shines forth with all the loveliness and reality of one warmed by the
sun. There that Soul of the Universe, the adorable Sambhu, fraught with
the spirits of the eleven Rudras—that lord of the gods—Brahma—dwelleth,
surrounded by the Brahmarshis. Ye cannot proceed to the north of the
Kurus; nor is there way in that region for any other creatures. And that
mountain is named Soma, incapable of being entered even by the gods.
Sighting this, you should speedily turn back. Ye foremost of monkeys,
the monkeys are competent to proceed thus far. Beyond that, of regions
sunless and limitless I know nothing. Ye should search all these which I
have described (unto you); and ye should also turn your attention to
others besides, which I have omitted to mention. Ye that are comparable
unto the wind or fire, by accomplishing the work of beholding Videha’s
daughter, ye will do what is held as exceedingly dear unto Daçaratha’s
son as well as highly grateful to me. Then, having achieved success, do
ye, along with your friends, honored by me, and crowned with every
virtue, ye monkeys, with your enemies slain, range the earth in company
with your wives,—the support of all beings."

  ¹⁵² Belonging, according to the commentator, to Himavān.—T.

  ¹⁵³ The present text, according to Kataka, drops a _sloka_, whose last
      line is, Beings possessed of powerful effulgence, sport here
      always in company with females."—T.




## SECTION XLIV.


Sugriva had declared his conviction that he relied particularly upon
Hanumān. And convinced as to the ability of that best of monkeys to
accomplish the work, Sugriva, that lord of all the dwellers of the
woods, well pleased, spoke unto Hanumān, son unto the wind-god,
saying,—"O foremost of monkeys, neither on the earth, nor in the sky,¹⁵⁴
nor in the etherial regions,¹⁵⁵ nor yet in water, find I any obstacle to
thy course. The entire worlds with Asuras, and Gandharbas, and Nāgas,
and men, and gods, with oceans, and the earth and the regions
beneath—are well known unto thee. And thy motion, vehemence, energy and
fleetness are, O hero, O mighty ape, even like those of thy sire, the
powerful wind-god; and there exists no creature on earth that is like
unto thee in energy. Therefore do thou bethink thee how Sitā may be
recovered. Even in thee, O thou versed in policy, are strength, and wit,
and courage, and policy, and conduct in consonance with season and
place." Thereat, understanding that success in the task depended upon
Hanumān, and also knowing what Hanumān was, Rāghava reflected,—"This
lord of monkeys is every way confident concerning Hanumān; and Hanumān
himself is even more confident of achieving succes in the work. He that
hath been tested by his deed, and who hath been considered worthiest by
his master, having been commissioned in this business,—success in the
work is certain." Then beholding that monkey who was the fittest for the
task, that exceedingly energetic one, (Rāma), with his mind and senses
exhilarated, considering himself as already crowned with success, felt
the excess of joy. And well pleased, that subduer of enemies handed to
Hanumān a ring inscribed with his name, as a sign unto Ihe king’s
daughter. "By this sign, O foremost of monkeys, Janaka’s daughter will
be able to see thee fearlessly, as one that hath come from me. Thy
firmness, O hero, and sterling prowess, as well as Sugriva’s saying,
tell me greatly of success." Thereupon, taking that (ring), and raising
his joined palms to his head, that foremost and best of monkeys,
saluting (Rāma’s) feet, went away. Then taking with him that mighty host
of monkeys, that hero, the son of the wind, resembled the moon of bright
disc in the sky, garnished by the stars, after the clouds have departed.
"O thou of excessive strength! I take refuge in thy might. O thou
endowed with the prowess of the foremost of lions! do thou, O son of the
Wind, O Hanumān, exert thyself so, summoning the great strength thou art
master of, that we may obtain Janaka’s daughter."¹⁵⁶

  ¹⁵⁴ _Antariksha_—regions above the earth in which the birds fly.—T.

  ¹⁵⁵ _Amvara_—Upper air.

  ¹⁵⁶ The commentator says that this speech is equally attributable to
      Rāma and Sugriva. But I think, it would fit Rāma’s lips to a
      nicety—T.




## SECTION XLV.


Summoning all the monkeys, that foremost of monkeys, king Sugriva, spake
unto them all touching the success of Rāma’s work. "The monkey-chiefs,
knowing the stern command of their lord, should search in all these
places." Then, covering up the earth like locusts, they marched away.
Expecting tidings of Sitā, Rāma remained that month in the vicinity of
that cascade, in company with Lakshmana. And that heroic monkey Satavali
swiftly set out for the northern regions covered by the monarch of
mountains. And that leader of monkey herds, Vinatā, proceeded towards
the eastern quarter. And that monkey, Hanumān—leader of monkey-herds—in
company with Tāra, Angada and others, went to the South, inhabited by
Agastya. And that lord of monkeys, Sushena, lion among monkeys, went to
the terrible western quarter, protected by Varuna. Then, having properly
despatched (his forces) in all directions, that general of the monkey
hosts, being pleased, gave himself up to sport. Thus despatched by the
king, the monkey-chiefs proceeded apace respectively towards their
destined quarters. And the monkeys possessed of great strength cried and
howled and roared and shouted and rushed and sent up loud ululations.
Thus despatched by the king, the leaders of monkey-herds, said, "We
shall bring back Sitā, and slay Rāvana. I alone shall slay Rāvana
engaged in conflict. And slaying (him), I shall this very day swiftly
carry off Janaka’s daughter, trembling because of fatigue, (saying unto
her), ’Rest thou.’ I single-handed shall recover Jānaki even from the
nether regions. I shall uproot trees and rive mountains. I shall cleave
the earth and vex the deep." (And some said), "I can, without doubt,
clear a Yojana at one bound;" and another said, "I can clear an
hundred;" and a yet another, "I can more than an hundred. And neither on
earth, nor in sea, mountains, woods, nor nether regions, can my course
be obstructed." Thus did the apes proud of their strength, severally
speak in presence of the sovereign of the monkeys.




## SECTION XLVI.


On the monkey-chiefs having departed, Rāma said unto Sugriva,—"How is it
that thou knowest all the quarters of this earth?" Thereupon, the
self-controlled Sugriva, bowing low, said unto Rāma,—"Do thou listen to
my words. I shall relate everything. When Vāli pursued the Dānava
Dunduvi,¹⁵⁷ wearing the form of a buffalo, towards the Malaya mountain,
Mahisha entered a cave of that mountain. And Vāli also, desirous of
slaying the Asura, entered Malaya. And I was made to stand at the mouth
in humble guise; nor did Vāli issue out, although a good year rolled
away. Then the cave became filled with blood gushing out vehemently.
Seeing this, I became amazed, and exercised with the poison of grief on
account of my brother. And I, losing my sense, thought that my superior
had for certain been slain. And I placed a crag huge as a hill at the
mouth of the cave. (And thought I), ’Mahisha, unable to issue out, needs
must meet his end.’ And despairing of his (Vāli’s) life, I retraced my
steps to Kishkindhā. And obtaining the spacious kingdom along with Tārā
and Uma, I began to pass my days in peace in company with his
counsellors. Then came that foremost of monkeys, having slain him
(Mahisha). Thereupon, I, influenced by fear, in consideration of his
dignity, made over to him his monarchy. But Vāli, his senses exercised
with sorrow, anxious to slay me, in company with his counsellors,
pursued me, who took to my heels. Hotly pursued and chased by Vāli, I
surveyed various streams and woods and cities. And I surveyed the earth
like the hoof-print of a cow, or the image reflected from a mirror, or a
fire-brand whirled (in the air.)¹⁵⁸ Then repairing to the East, I see
various trees, and mountains, and charming caves, and diverse tanks. And
there I behold the Ascending mountain decked with gold,—and that daily
abode of Apsarās—the sea of milk. And chased by Vāli, and flying on, I
suddenly veered round, and then again, master, off I went. And changing
that direction, I again made for the South crowded with trees belonging
to Vindhya, and embellished with sandal woods. Then seeing Vāli in the
mountain among trees, from the south I, pursued by Vāli, betook myself
to the western quarter. And beholding various countries, and arriving at
that foremost and best of mountains— Asta¹⁵⁹—I turned to the north; and
(passed) Himavat, and Meru, and the Northern sea. But pursued by Vāli,
refuge find I none. Then out spake Hanumān endeued with understanding,
’O king, now I remember me how that lord of monkeys, Vāli, was cursed by
Matanga in this very hermitage. If Vāli enters (into this asylum), his
head becomes cleft in hundred. There we shall dwell happily without
anxiety,’ O king’s son, thereupon, we went to the Rhisyamuka mountain,
nor did then Vāli enter there from fear of Matanga. Thus, king, did I
actually see all the world. And from that place I came to this cave."

  ¹⁵⁷ The real name of this Dānava is māyāvi. He is confusedly called
      Dunduvi and Mahisha, the latter, in consequence of the implication
      that his father having assumed the shape of a buffalo, he has also
      a like shape.—T.

  ¹⁵⁸ The commentator remarks that "like the hoof-print of a cow"
      espresses the ease with which Sugriva travelled the earth; "like a
      fire brand whirled" conveys his vehement speed; and "like the
      image reflected on a mirror" signifies the lucidity of his
      perception.—T.

  ¹⁵⁹ The Setting hill.—T.




## SECTION XLVII.


The principal monkeys, having been ordered by the monkey-king, speedily
went in all directions to their destinations for the purpose of seeing
Vaidehi. And on all sides they explore watery expanses, and streams, and
lawns, and commons, and cities, and tracts rendered impassable by
torrents. And the leaders of monkey-herds search all those countries,
described by Sugriva,—containing mountains, woods and forests. Engaged
during the day in search of Sitā, at night the monkeys seek the ground
(for sleep). In every place, by day coming to trees aye enjoying every
season, and crowned with fruits, the monkeys prepared their beds at
night.¹⁶⁰ Counting that day¹⁶¹ as the first, the principal monkeys,
after the month had run out, resigning all hope, came to the Fountain
and met with the monkey-king. And having explored the Eastern regions,
as directed, the exceedingly strong Vinatā not having been able to see
Sitā, came back, in company with his counsellors. And then that mighty
ape, Satavali, daunted in spirits, arrived with his forces, after having
searched all through the North. And having searched the West in company
with his monkeys, Sushena, on the month being complete, presented
himself before Sugriva. And coming to Sugriva seated along with Rāma
behind the Fountain, and saluting the former, Sushena said unto Sugriva,
—"Searched have been all the mountains, and deep woods, and streams, and
islands embosomed in the ocean, and the various provinces. And also
searched have been all the caves which have been described by thee; and
searched have been all the groves entertwined with plants; and thickets;
and difficult and uneven grounds. And huge animals have been sought out
and slain (by us). And all the impracticable places we have explored
again and again. O lord of monkeys, possessed of great strength and
nobly born, it is Hanumān who will be able to ascertain the whereabouts
of Mithilā’s daughter. And the Wind’s son, Hanumān, hath followed even
the path by which Sitā hath gone."

  ¹⁶⁰ The sense is rather obscure, it being difficult to understand the
      relation their beds bore to the neighbouring trees.—T.

  ¹⁶¹ _i.e._ the day of their departure.—T.




## SECTION XLVIII.


The monkey Hanumān in company with Tāra and Angada swiftly set out for
the quarter assigned by Sugriva. And having proceeded far along with all
those foremost of monkeys, he explored the caves and woods of Vindhya;
spots inaccessible in consequence of streams intervening in front of
mountains; and tanks; and tracts filled with trees; and various
mountains rife with wild trees. And having searched in all directions,
the monkeys could not find Maithili, Janaka’s daughter Sitā. And
subsisting on various fruits and roots, they were overcome with fatigue,
after searching dreadful forests, void of water, still and tenantless,
as well as other forests of a similar nature. And having searched that
country as well mighty forests containing caves, those leaders of
monkey-herds fearlessly explored other places, difficult of access,
where the trees are fruitless, and without flowers and foliage; where
the streams are waterless, and where roots even are rare; where there
are no buffaloes, or deer, or elephants, or tigers, or birds—or any
other animals that are found in forests. And there are there neither
trees, nor annual plants, nor creepers, nor herbs,—and in that place
there are no pleasant pools, with cool leaves, and filled with blown
lotuses; and it hath been renounced by the black-bees. There dwelleth a
Maharshi, Kandu by name, an eminently pious, and truthful ascetic,
irascible, and irrepressible because of his practice of self-discipline.
In that wood his son, a boy of ten years, his sands having run out,
breathed his last; and it is for this that the mighty ascetic hath come
under the influence of passion. And cursed by that high-souled one, the
entire mighty forest hath become unfit to harbour (any creatures);
difficult of entrance; and devoid of birds and beasts. They¹⁶² carefully
search the skirts of its woods, mountain-caves, and the sources of its
streams. And those high-souled ones, devoted to the good of Sugriva, did
not find Janaka’s daughter, or her ravisher, Rāvana. And entering (into
a wood), they saw a terrible Asura, concealed by the shrubs and
plants—of dreadful deeds, and cherishing no fear even of the gods. And
seeing that dreadful Asura, seated like a hill, and resembling a
mountain, they all tightened their cloths. And that strong one also,
saying unto the monkeys, "Destroyed are ye," and uplifting his clenched
fist, rushed after them in rage. And as he darted suddenly, Angada, the
son of Vāli, knowing, "This is Rāvana," administered unto him a slap.
Struck by Vāli’s son, that Asura, his mouth vomitting blood, fell down
to the earth like a hill toppled down. And on his having breathed his
last, the monkeys, elated with victory, thoroughly searched that
mountain cavern. And when they had satisfied themselves that the cave
had been searched all through, the dwellers of the woods entered another
fearful mountain cavern. And after having searched (that place) also,
they came out fatigued; and with desponding hearts sat them down at a
distance under the shade of a tree.

  ¹⁶² _i.e._ the monkeys.




## SECTION XLIX.


When the eminently wise Angada, fatigued, spake unto all the monkeys,
cheering them,—’Woods, and mountains, and rivers, and impenetrable
wilds, and valleys, and mountain caverns have been thoroughly searched.
But Jānaki we have failed to find anywhere,—or that wicked wight, the
Rākshasa that hath ravished Sitā. And we have spent a great part of the
term that had been assigned by Sugriva of stern commands. Therefore,
banishing languor, sadness, and invading drowsiness, do ye together
search all round. Do ye so search Sitā, that she may be found out (by
us). High spirits, ability and forwardness in action, are said to
conduce to success. Therefore it is that I speak thus unto you. Ye
dwellers of the wood, do ye to day rummage this impenetrable wood;
renouncing grief, do ye again search through this forest. Those who act,
for certain behold the fruit of their endeavours; but if people once
give way to grief, they cannot again attain vigor. Ye monkeys, king
Sugriva is irascible; and inflicteth sharp punishments. He should be
always feared, as also the magnanimous Rāma. I tell you this for your
good. Act accordingly, if ye list. And do ye also express what else ye
are capable of." Hearing Angada’s words Gandhamādana said in candid
words faint from thirst and fatigue,—"What Angada hath said unto us is
worthy of him, and is beneficial and good. Do you follow his speech. Let
us afresh search hills, caves and rocks, vacant forests and mountain
cascades,—in accordance with what the high-souled Sugriva hath laid
down. Let all in a body rummage the wood, and the mountain caverns."
There rising up, the mighty monkeys again began to range the South close
with forests belonging to Vindhya. And the monkeys ascended the Silvern
Hill resembling the autumnal welkin, graceful, and furnished with
summits and valleys. And eager to behold Sitā, those excellent monkeys
began to search the Lodhra wood, and the Saptaparna forests. And
ascending its top,¹⁶³ those ones endeued with immense prowess,
experiencing fatigue, could not find Vaidehi, the beloved spouse of
Rāma. And having surveyed that hill having many a grot, so far as the
eye could range, the monkeys looking all round, descended (the
eminence). And having descended to the earth, the monkeys, bewildered,
and losing their consciousness, rested for a while at the foot of a
tree. And their fatigue having gone off a little, the monkeys, having
been refreshed for a while, again prepared to explore the whole South.
And the monkey chiefs, headed by Hanumān, having set out (on the
search), began to range all through Vindhya.

  ¹⁶³ _i. e._ the top of the Silvern Hill.—T.




## SECTION L.


The monkey, Hanumān, in company with Tāra and Angada searcheth the caves
and woods of Vindhya,—caverns all around haunted by lions and tigers,
and in vast inaccessibls cascades in that foremost of mountains. And
they came to the south-western summit of the mountain. And when they
sojourned there, their (appointed) term had not expired. And that
spacious country, consisting as it did, of caves and grots and woods,
was difficult to search. And there the wind-god’s offspring searched all
over the mountain. And each apart remaining at no great distance from
the others, Gaya, Gavākha and Gavaya, Sarava, Gandhamādana, Maindi,
Dwivida, and Hanumān, Jambavān, the youthful prince Angada, and Tāra,
remaining in sight of the wood, after having searched the South—lands
covered with mountain ranges, were searching (about), when they espied
an unenclosed cavity, difficult of entry, named Vrikshavila, guarded by
a Dānava. And tried by hunger and thirst, worn out with fatigue, seeking
for water, they found that cavity surrounded by trees and plants. And,
with their bodies drenched and reddened with lotus dust, Kraunchas and
swans and cranes and Chakravākas, came out of the cavity. And drawing
nigh to that fragrant and inaccessible cave, those superior monkeys were
struck with amaze, and became eager (to enter into it). And with their
minds filled with doubt, those vigorous foremost of monkeys gladly
approached that cave; abounding in diverse animals, resembling the
residence of the lord of Daityas,¹⁶⁴ dazzling, and dreadful, and
impenetrable on all sides.—Then Hanumān the son of the wind-god,
possessed of the splendour of a mountain-summit, cognizant of woods and
forests, said unto the grim-visaged apes, "Having explored the South,
(containing) countries enveloped with mountain chains, we have ail got
fatigued, but we have failed to find Mithilā’s daughter. And from yonder
cave come out swarms of swans and cranes and _kraunchas_ and
_chakravākas_, drenched with water. For certain here is a well or a
watery expanse. And at the mouth of the cave there are these cool
trees." Hanumān having said this, all the monkeys went into the cave
covered with darkness; without the sun or the moon, capable of making
one’s down stand on end. And seeing lions, and birds and beasts (ranging
around), those tiger-like monkeys entered that cave covered with
darkness. And (there) neither their ken, nor their vigor, nor yet their
prowess was baffled: and their speed resembled the wind, and their sight
remained unimpaired albeit in darkness. And those foremost of monkeys
rushed into the cavity; and beheld displayed (before them) an excellent
and charming scene. And embracing each other in that fearful cave rife
with various trees, they passed over an hundred _yojanas_. And deprived
of their sense, and tried with thirst, and bewildered, and thirsting for
water, they for a time vigilantly descended in darkness down the cave.
And emaciated, with woe-begone faces, and spent, those monkeys
despairing of their lives, (at last) saw light. And those mild ones,
coming to a spot free from darkness, saw golden trees, possessed of the
brightness of flaming fire. And Sālas and palms, and Tamālas, Punnāgas,
Vanjulas, and Dhavas, Champakas, Naga trees, Karnikāras in flower; with
variegated golden bunches and twigs, and crests of clusters, and
plants,—embellished with golden garniture; resembling the infantine
sun,—on daises composed of lapises;—golden trees with resplendent
bodies, having the hues of purple lapises; and lotus-plants flocked with
fowls; and (spots) surrounded by large golden trees, like unto the
infantine sun; and tanks with large fishes of gold and lotuses,
containing pleasant waters—all these they saw there. And the monkeys saw
there golden as well as silvern vehicles, and elegant dwellings all
round veiled with nets of pearls; having golden balconys; with their
grounds paved with gold and silver; and furnished with lapis lazulis.
And on all sides they saw trees bearing fruits and flowers resembling
coral; and golden black bees, and honey all round, and various spacious
seats and beds about dight with gold and jewels. And searching in that
cave, the exceedingly effulgent heroic monkeys saw heaps of golden,
silver and bell-metal vessels; and heaps of excellent _aguru_ and
sandal; and pure fruits and roots; and costly vehicles and various kinds
of sapid honey; and loads of costly attire; and lots of variegated
woolen cloths and deer-skins; as well as a female, from near. And they
found her there, wearing a black deer-skin,— a female ascetic, with
restrained fare—as if flaming in energy. Amazed, the monkeys sat them
down in a body. And then Hanumān asked her,—"Who art thou? And to whom
doth this cave belong?" And Hanumān like unto a hill, bowing down unto
the old women with joined hands, asked her, saying,—’Who art thou? And
tell me, to whom belong this edifice and the cave as well as all these
jewels."

  ¹⁶⁴ _i. e._ the subterranean regions.—T.




## SECTION LI.


Having said this unto that female clad in a piece of black deer-skin,
Hanumān asked that highly religious ascetic practising pious offices,
"Having rashly entered this cave enveloped in gloom, we have been
exercised with hunger and thirst; and are extremely faint. And, having
entered this mighty cave underneath the earth, we have become thirsty.
And seeing all these wonderful phenomena, we have become afflicted, and
bewildered; and have lost our sense. To whom belong these golden trees
resembling the infantine sun; and the pure fruits and roots; and the
houses and vehicles of gold and silver,—veiled in networks of jewels,
and furnished with golden windows? And by whose energy are these golden
trees (here), bearing flowers, crowned with fruits, grateful to the
sight, and breathing rich odour? And golden lotuses spring in lucent
water,—how golden fishes are discovered in it along with tortoises! Have
these sprung from thy power; or do they owe their existence to the
ascetic energy of any other? It behoves thee to relate all this unto us
who are ignorant of everything." Thus addressed by Hanumān, the female
ascetic practising righteousness, and engaged in the welfare of all
beings, replied unto Hanumān,— "O foremost of monkeys, there is one,
named Maya, spreader of illusions. By him hath this entire golden grove
been constructed through his wonderful power of construction. He that
hath reared this excellent golden grove, and this charming mansion, was
formerly the Viçwakarmā¹⁶⁵ of the principal Dānavas. Having for a
thousand years practised austerities in this vast foiest, he obtained a
boon from the Great-father,— in virtue of which he had attained
consummate mastery in his art, as well as absolute control over the
materials required therein. Having accomplished everything, that
powerful one, commanding every enjoyment, for a time happily dwelt in
this mighty forest. Then he, happening to conceive a passion for an
Apsarā, Hemā (by name), Purandarā,vigorously wielding his thunder-bolt,
struck him dead. Then Brahma conferred on Hemā this fine forest and this
golden mansion, with the perpetual privilege of enjoying every pleasure
herein. I, Sayamprabhā by name,—the daughter of Merusāvarni, guard this
house of Hemā, O foremost of monkeys. Hemā, skilled in dance and song,
is my dear friend. Having received her blessing, I guard this vast
forest. What is thy errand? And why is it that ye have arrived at these
lone woods? And how have you managed to see this inaccessible forest?
Having partaken of these fruits and roots intended for use, and drunk,
do ye detail all this to me."

  ¹⁶⁵ The name of the celestial architect.—T.




## SECTION LII.


Then to all the monkey-chiefs, after they had rested, the female
ascetic, engaged in righteous practices, eagerly said these words,—"Ye
monkeys, if your pain hath gone off in consequence of the fare of fruits
which you have partaken, and also if it be fit to be heard by me, I
would listen to your narration." Hearing her words, Hanumān, the son of
the wind-god, in all candour began to relate everything faithfully. "The
Sovereign of all this world, resembling Mahendra or Varuna, Rāma, the
graceful son of Daçaratha, entered the woods of Dandaka, in company with
his brother, Lakshmana, as well as his spouse, Vaidehi. His wife hath
been forcibly carried off by Rāvana. His friend is that heroic king, the
monkey named Sugriva. By that monarch of the foremost monkeys have we
been despatched (hither). And we have, joining company with these prime
monkeys headed by Angada, come to the South, protected by Yama, and
inhabited by Agastya. And we have been commissioned, ’Do ye all search
for the Rākshasa Rāvana, wearing forms at will, along with Videha’s
daughter, Sitā’. Having searched through the forest as well as the ocean
on the South, we, becoming hungry, sat down at the foot of a tree. And
with pallid countenances, we all, absorbed in thought, sank in a wide
sea of anxiety, which we could not cross. And casting our eyes around,
we spyed a huge cave covered with trees and plants and enveloped in
gloom. And (it came to pass that) from this (cave) came out swans,
drenched with water, with drops of water on their wings,—and plumed
_kuravas_ and cranes. ’Let us enter here’, said I unto the monkeys. And
they also arrived at that conclusion.¹⁶⁶ And thereupon they, bestirring
themselves, entered into the cave. And firmly griping each other’s
hands, they at once made entry into the cave covered with darkness. This
is our errand; and it is on this job that we have come. And having come
to thee, hungry and exhausted, we,who had been sore tried by hunger,
have been entertained with fruits and roots, agreeably to the code
regulating hospitality. And as thou hast saved the monkeys, who were
weary and suffering from hunger, tell (me),—what benefit shall the
monkeys do thee in return?" Thus addressed by the apes, the all-knowing
Sayamprabhā replied unto the monkey-chiefs, saying,—"Well pleased am I
with the fast-footing monkeys. But by one engaged in my duties, there is
no work that is desiderated." Thus accosted in excellent words fraught
with asceticism and righteousness, Hanumān spoke unto that one of
faultless eyes, saying,—"We all take refuge in thee, practising piety.
The term that had been fixed by the high-souled Sugriva in respect of
us, shall all be spent in this cave. Therefore it behoveth thee to
deliver us from this place. And it behoveth thee to save us, exercised
with fear for Sugriva,—who, happening to override Sugriva’s command,
shall lose our lives. And, further, O thou that practisest
righteousness, great is the task that is to be performed by us. But if
we stay here, that work of ours shall remain unaccomplished." Thus
addressed by Hanumān, the ascetic said,—"Once entering, hard it is for
any one to return (hence) alive. But by the potency of my asceticism
acquired through self-discipline, I shall deliver all the monkeys from
this den. Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye close your eyes. No one is able
to issue out of this place without closing one’s eyes." Then
they,eagerly desirous of going out, closed their sight¹⁶⁷ with their
hands furnished with tender fingers. And the magnanimous monkeys, with
their faces covered with their palms, were in the twinkling of an eye,
liberated from the den by her. And then the pious anchoret spoke unto
them there. And when they had come out of the fearful den, cheering them
up, she said,— "This is the fair Vindhya mountain filled with various
trees and herbs. This is the Praçravana hill; and this is the great
deep. Fair Fortune! I go to my abode, ye foremost of monkeys." Having
spoken thus, Sayamprabhā entered that captivating cave.

  ¹⁶⁶ Namely, _that water was to be found there_.—T.

  ¹⁶⁷ The text has _nimilitah—and thus they closed their eyes_. This
      redundant epithet has been left out in the translation, as it
      would render the version extremely awkward.—T.




## SECTION LIII.


Then they saw the ocean—abode of Varuna—shoreless, resounding, rife with
dreadful billows. Exploring the mountain fastness of Maya,¹⁶⁸ they spent
the month that had been set by the king. Then sitting down at the foot
of the Vindhya mountain, containing blossoming trees, at that time¹⁶⁹
those high-souled ones indulged in reflections. And beholding vernal
trees bending beneath the load of flowers, and environed by hundreds of
plants, they were inspired with apprehension. And each knowing that
spring had appeared, they, the term apppointed for their task having run
out, dropped down on the ground. Thereat, with bland words properly
honoring the aged apes and the rest dwelling in the woods, that monkey
having the shoulders of a lion or a bull, and plump and broad arms—the
youthful prince Angada, endowed with high wisdom, spoke,—"We have come
out at the mandate of the monarch of monkeys. While we sojourned in the
cave, a full month had passed away, ye monkeys. Why do yoti not
understand this? We set out, engaging that our term of search should
reach no further than the end of Kārtika;¹⁷⁰ but that hath expired. Now,
what next is to be done? having received the orders (of the king), ye,
conversant with morality, engaged in the welfare of your master, expert
in every work,incomparable in execution, and renowned in every quarter,
have come out, commanded by the lord of monkeys. Now, having failed to
attain our object, we shall meet with death, There is no doubt whatever
about this. Who, having been unsuccessful in doing the mandate of the
king of monkeys, enjoyeth ease? Now all the rangers of the forest should
fast unto death. Naturally stern, Sugriva, established as our master,
shall not forgive us, when we repair there, after having disgressed
thus. Sitā not having been found out, Sugriva, for certain, shall commit
this sin.¹⁷¹ Therefore it is fit that, forsaking our sons, and wives,
and wealth, and homes, we this very day sit down to starve ourselves to
death. Death at this place is preferrable to the unequal punishment (we
must meet with at the hands of Sugriva). And, further, I have not been
installed heir-apparent by Sugriva: I have been sprinkled by that
foremost of kings, Rāma of untiring energy. Entertaining enmity against
me of old, the king, seeing this lapse, must be firmly determined to
take my life by means of a severe sentence. What is the use of suffering
my friends to look on my disaster at the last moment of my existence?
Therefore even on this sacred shore of the sea shall I sit down to
starve myself.” Hearing the tender prince speak thus, all those
principal monkeys pathetically observed,— “Sugriva is harsh by nature,
and Rāghava loveth his wife dearly. The time appointed having passed by,
seeing us (come) without attaining success in the task, and seeing us
arrive without obtaining a sight of Vaidehi, (Sugriva) shall certainly
slay us from the desire of doing what is agreeable to Rāghava. Those who
have transgressed, cannot come to the side of their master. Having come
hither as the principal servants of Sugriva, we shall either see Sitā or
obtain information concerning her, or else, O hero, we shall repair to
the mansion of Yama.” Hearing the speeches of the monkeys afflicted with
fear, Tāra said,—"No use of indulging in grief. If ye relish it, let us
all entering the cave, dwell there. This place abounding in flowers and
waters, meats and drinks,— which hath been brought forth by the power of
illusion, is incapable of being approached. Here we have no fear from
Purandara, or Rāghava, or the king of monkeys.” Hearing the welcome
words of Angada, the monkeys, being convinced, said,—“Do thou this very
day so order that we may not be slain.”

  ¹⁶⁸ Named Rhikshavila.—T.

  ¹⁶⁹ _i. e._ at the beginning of winter.—T.

  ¹⁷⁰ _October._

  ¹⁷¹ _i. e._ slay us.—T.




## SECTION LIV.


When Tāra, bright as the moon, had spoken thus, Hanumān felt as if
Angada had already deprived (Sugriva) of his kingdom.¹⁷² Hanumān deemed
Vāli’s son as endowed with intelligence consisting of eight elements;
with power of four kinds; and the four and ten virtues; as ever fraught
with energy, strength and prowess; as growing in grace like the moon
during the lighted fortnight; as resembling Brihaspati in intelligence;
and in prowess, his own sire; and as ever listening to Tāra’s counsels,
as Purandara listens to the counsels of Sukra. And Hanumān versed in all
branches of learning, finding Angada Backward in the affair of his
master, began to inspire him with fear.¹⁷³ He, wealthy in words, laying
under contribution the second of the four means,¹⁷⁴ had created division
among those monkeys. On their being divided, he (Hanumān) set about
raising Angada’s apprehension by various fear-fraught speech, referring
to punishments. "O Tara’s son, thou art for certain more capable of
fight than even thy sire; and thou art also able to hold the
monkey-kingdom as firmly as he. But, O foremost of monkeys, the monkeys
are always inconstant in character. Bereft of their wives and sons, they
shall not bear thy behest. And they shall never take to thee. This I
tell thee in presence of all. And I will tell thee what. Thou neither by
the virtues of conciliation, charity and the rest, nor by chastisement,
shalt succeed in drawing to thy side this Jāmbavān, or Nila, or the
mighty ape Suhotra, or myself. A strong one wronging another that is
weak, can live; therefore a weak person anxious for self-preservation,
should never wrong (a strong individual). Thou considerest that this
cave may serve for thy protectress,¹⁷⁵ having heard of it (said by
Tāra); but to rive the same is but light work for the shafts of
Lakshmana. Formerly this was cleft a little by Indra, with his
thunderbolt hurled (against it)¹⁷⁶; but now Lakshmana would pierce it
like a leaf-stalk, by means of his keen arrows. Lakshmana hath many an
iron arrow like Indra’s thunderbolt or that of the sky,¹⁷⁷ capable of
riving even mountains. O subduer of enemies, soon as thou shalt set up
here, the monkeys, making up their minds, shall forsake thee.
Remembering their wives and sons, ever anxious (on account of Sugriva),
pining for domestic happiness, and aggrieved (at their pitiable plight),
they shall turn their backs upon thee. Then forsaken by thy kindred as
well as friends seeking thy welfare, thou shalt be struck with affright
even at a quaking blade of grass. If thou make head (against Sugriva),
the sharpened shafts of Lakshmana, terrible, of exceeding impetuosity
and mighty vehemence, and incapable of being baffled, shall be eager to
slay thee. On the contrary, if thou in humble guise present thyself
(before him) along with us, he shall establish thee in the kingdom, in
consideration of thy being the next heir. A righteous sovereign, steady
in vow, clean, and truthful in promise, thy uncle, who cherishes
affection for thee, shall not by any means chastise thee. And he loves
thy mother, and his life is for her; and she hath no other son.
Therefore, O Angadu, go along with us."

  ¹⁷² The sense is very obscure. One meaning is that Hanumān thought
      that Angada acquiescing in what Tāra had said, must remain
      there,—and ultimately endeavour to wrest the kingdom from Sugriva.
      Another meaning is: Hanumān conceived that remaining there in
      peace, Angada would consider his Position as enviable as if he had
      extorted the kingdom from Sugriva.—T.

  ¹⁷³ Touching Tāra.—T.

  ¹⁷⁴ Referred to above.—T.

  ¹⁷⁵ The word meaning _cave_ is feminine in Sanskrit.—T.

  ¹⁷⁶ The commentator interprets the passage differently: "Formerly
      Indra did a little damage herein—_i. e._ merely slew Maya, the
      architect of the mansion." This is ingenuity. I give the plain
      sense.—T.

  ¹⁷⁷ _Vajrāçani—Vajra_ is the thunder-bolt in the hand of Indra, and
      _Açani—_ the thunder-bolt produced by clouds.—T.




## SECTION LV.


Hearing Hanumān’s speech, uttered meekly, fraught with morality, and
reflecting honor upon Sugriva, Angada said,— "Firmness, and mental
sanctity, mercy, candour, prowess, and patience, are not in Sugriva. He
that, while her son is living, appropriateth the beloved queen of his
elder brother, mother unto him by morality, is hated of all beings). How
can he that could cover up the mouth of the cave, when he had been
desired by his brother gone on martial mission, to guard the same,—(how
can _he_) know morality? Whose good office rememhereth _he_ who could
forget the renowned Rāghava himself of mighty deeds, after having, in
the name of truth, taken his hand? How can he reap religious merit, that
directed us to search Sitā here, from fear of Lakshmana, and not from
fear of unrighteousness? What noble person, in especial, sprung in his
race, shall any longer repose confidence in that impious one of unstable
soul who hath run amuck of morality? Meritorious or otherwise, how can
Sugriva, having installed in the kingdom me, son (of his enemy) and the
enemy sprung in his race,—suffer me to live? How can I, whose counsels
have been revealed, who have transgressed, and who have been deprived of
my power, repairing to Kishkindhā like one forlorn and feeble, live? For
the sake of his kingdom, Sugriva, wily, cunning and cruel, shall put me
in solitary confinement. For me fasting to death is better than being
confined and suffering the consequent misery. Do ye grant me your
permision; and go to your homes, ye monkeys. I vow before you, to the
palace I will never repair. At this very spot will I fast for death; as
death is good for me. Bowing unto the king as well as unto the powerful
Rāghava, ye should communicate my well-being unto Sugriva—lord of
apes—and my health and peace unto my mother Uma. And it behoves you also
to console my mother, Tārā. Naturally fond of her son, and overflowing
with tenderness, that lorn one, hearing of my death at this place, shall
certainly renounce her life." Having said this, Angada, saluting the
elders, with a woebegone face entered the earth covered with grass. When
he had entered, those foremost monkeys, stricken with sorrow, weeping
shed warm tears from their eyes. And censuring Sugriva and praising
Vāli, they, surrounding Angada, determined to starve themselves to
death. Taking to heart the speech of Vāli’s son, those prime monkeys,
sipping water, sat down facing the East. And sitting on the edge of the
water on grass pointing to the south, the foremost monkeys, wishing for
surcease, thought within themselves,—"Even this is fit for us." And as
they spoke of the exile of Rāma and the demise of Daçaratha, the carnage
in Janasthāna, the slaying of Jatāyu, the ravishment of Vaidehi, the
slaughter of Vāli, and the ire of Rāma, the monkeys were seized with
fear. When those monkeys resembling mountain-summits had entered in,
they set up cries, which, like unto the rumbling of clouds, making the
sky resound, made that mountain with its rills reverberate.




## SECTION LVI.


When the monkeys had been seated in that mountain, with the intention of
putting a period to their existence through fasting, a king of vultures
happened to come to that quarter. And that long-lived bird was named
Sampāti, the beautiful brother of Jatāyu, famous for his strength and
prowess. Issuing from a cavern of the mighty mountain Vindhya, he,
seeing the monkeys seated, well pleased, said— "Verily man¹⁷⁸ reapeth
the fruit of his former acts; and therefore it is that this food
ordained to that end, comes to me after a long time. I shall feed on
these monkeys, one by one, slaying them one after another." Eying those
apes, the bird expressed himself thus. Hearing this speech of the bird
coveting his food, Angada faintly spoke to Hanumān, "Behold! through
Sitā’s simplicity¹⁷⁹ this one—the very son of the Sun, Yama—hath come to
this place, to exterminate the monkeys. Rāma’s work hath not been done;
nor the royal mandate. And this disaster hath arrived unthought of by
the monkeys. Ye have in detail heard all that, inspired with the desire
of doing what is good unto Vaidehi, that king of vultures, Jatāyu, did
here. In this way, all creatures, even the brute species, compass the
welfare of Rāma, renouncing their lives, as we do. It is because of the
love and tenderness¹⁸⁰ they bear towards (Rāma), that people do good
unto each other. And therefore the righteous Jatāyu, of his own accord
laying down his life, hath done the pleasure of Rāma. We also, overcome
with fatigue and (almost) dying, have come to this forest; but Mithilā’s
daughter we find not. Happy is that king of vultures, having been slain
by Rāvana in battle. He hath got quit of the fear of Sugriva, and hath
also attained supreme state. In consequence of the death of Jatāyu and
that of king Daçaratha, as well as owing to the ravishment of Vaidehi,
(the lives of) the monkeys have come into jeopardy. Rāma’s and
Lakshmana’s abode in the forest with Sitā, Rāghava’s slaying of Vāli
with a shaft, the slaughter of innumerable Rākshasas by the enraged
Rāma, and (finally) this mishap—all these owe their orgin to the
bestowal of the boon on Kaikeyi." Seeing the monkeys stretched on the
earth, and hearing their piteous words describing their grief, that
magnanimous king of vultures, with his mind agitated, said (this). And
hearing the words that issued from Angada’s mouth, the sharp-beaked and
high-toned vulture, said,— "Who is it that, making my mind tremble,
speaketh of the death of my brother, Jatāyu, dearer unto me than life?
How happened in Janasthāna the fight between the Rākshasa and the
vulture? It is after a long time that to-day I hear the name of my
brother. I wish to alight from this mountain-fastness. I have been well
pleased by listening after a long time to the celebration of the virtues
of my younger brother, cognizant of qualities and worthy of being
extolled by reason of his prowess. Ye foremost of monkeys, I wish to
hear of the destruction of Jatāyu, who dwelt in Janasthāna. And how
could Daçaratha, whose beloved eldest son is Rāma, dear unto his
superiors, be the friend of my brother? I can not move in consequence of
my wings having been burnt by the solar rays. But I wish that ye may
take me down from this mountain."

  ¹⁷⁸ Although out of character, the epithet _naram—man (acc.)_—is used
      by the vulture.—T.

  ¹⁷⁹ Another reading is _Gridhrā padesana—through the vulture’s
      cunning_. This the commentator considers as preferrable.—T.

  ¹⁸⁰ The commentator explains in pure orthodox fashion: _Because
      everything is in Rāma, people serve each other from the love and
      tenderness, which pertain to him.—T._




## SECTION LVII.


Hearing his accents faltering through grief, the leaders of
monkey-herds, alarmed by his action,¹⁸¹ did not repose confidence in his
speech. Seated for the purpose of fasting to death, the monkeys, seeing
the vulture, with terror thought within themselves,—"He shall eat us all
up. If he eat us up, who have sat down to fast to death, we shall secure
success, and speedily attain our end." Then those monkey-chiefs resolved
thus. And descending from the summit of the mountain, Angada spoke unto
the vulture,—"There was a lord of monkeys named Rhiksharāja, endowed
with prowess. That king, O bird, was my grandsire. He had two virtuous
sons, exceedingly powerful both—Vāli and Sugriva. My father, Vāli, was
famed in the world for his deeds. And it came to pass that mighty
monarch of all this earth, descendant of the Ikshwākus, the great and
graceful car-warrior, Rāma, son unto Daçaratha, intent upon the
injunction of his sire, resorting to the path of righteousness, entered
the woods of Dandaka in company with his brother, Lakshmana and his wife
Vaidehi. And his spouse was forcibly carried away from Janasthāna. And
the friend of Rāma’s father, the king of vultures, named Jatāyu, saw
Videha’s daughter, Sitā, as she was being carried away in the sky. And
after having thrown down Rāvana from his car, and placed Maithili on the
ground, (that vulture) old and overcome with fatigue was (at length)
slain by Rāvana in battle. Thus slain by the powerful Rāvana, the
vulture, having had his funereal obsequies performed by Rāma (himself),
hath attained excellent state. Then Rāghava made friends with my uncle,
the high-souled Sugriva; and he also slew my sire. My father had
debarred Sugriva from the kingdom along with his counsellors; but Rāma,
having slain Vāli, installed him (Sugriva). And established in the
monarchy by him (Rāma), Sugriva is (now) the master of the monkeys and
king of all the foremost monkeys. By him have we been sent. Despatched
hither by Rāma, we have searched for Sitā all round, but Vaidehi we have
not found, as one doth not find the solar splendour at night. And it
came to pass that, having heedfully explored the Dandaka forest, we
through ignorance entered a cave lying open before. That cave, thou must
know, was constructed by the illusive energy of Maya. And there we spent
a month—the term which had been fixed by the monarch. Doing the behests
of the king of monkeys, we, having over-stayed the term which had been
appointed, have from fear sat here down for the purpose of fasting unto
death. On that Kākutstha being wrought up with wrath, as well as Sugriva
together with Lakshmana, we, repairing thither, shall lose our lives."

  ¹⁸¹ _Karmanā (instru) by his action._ The commentator explains:
      _alarmed by his speech about eating up the monkeys_. The passage
      is obscure.—T.




## SECTION LVIII.


When the monkeys, whose lives had well nigh departed out of them, had
spoken these piteous words, the vulture, in solemn accents, with tears
in his eyes, said unto the monkeys, —"Ye monkeys, ye have said that my
younger brother, named Jatāyu, hath been slain in battle by the powerful
Rāvana. On account of my age and want of wings, I, although hearing
this, bear it. Nor have I strength to-day to clear scores touching my
brother’s enmity. Formerly, while engaged in the destruction of Vritra,
he and I, burning for victory, soared in the sky near the flaming sun,
garlanded by glory. Thence impetuously wheeling round, we went to the
celestial regions along the etherial way. And it came to pass that,
coming midway of the sun, Jatāyu was faint. Witnessing my brother
severely struck by the solar rays, and exceedingly stupified, I from
affection shadowed him with my wings. Thereat, my pinions scathed, I
dropped down on Vindhya, ye foremost of monkeys; and staying here, I
could not know the circumstances that have befallen my brother." Thus
addressed by Jatāyu’s brother, Sampāti, the eminently wise prince Angada
answered,—"if thou art indeed the brother of Jatāyu, having heard what I
have related, tell (us) if thou knowest touching the abode of that
Rākshasa. Tell us if thou knowest anent that short-sighted worst of
Rākshasas, Rāvana, whether staying far or near." Thereat, rejoicing the
monkeys, the exceedingly energetic elder brother of Jatāyu spoke words
worthy of him,—"Ye monkeys, my pinions have been burnt; and I am a
vulture shorn of strength. Therefore I will help Rāma well by my words.
I know the realms of Varuna, and Vishnu’s Trivikrama¹⁸² worlds, the wars
of the gods and Asuras, and the churning for ambrosia. And albeit age
hath deprived me of energy, and albeit my life hangs loosely on me, yet,
if this is Rāma’s work, it should be done by me first. I have seen a
youthful and beautiful female, adorned with all ornaments, carried away
by the wicked Rāvana,—the lady (all the while) crying, ’O Rāma!’ ’O
Rāma!’ ’O Lakshmana!’ And taking her ornaments from her person, she was
throwing them on the ground. Her silken cloth seemed like the solar
splendour on the summit of a mountain; and herself beside the sable
Rākshasa, looked like the lightning in the welkin (beside clouds). From
your relation of Rāma, I conclude that she must be Sitā. Now listen to
me as I tell you about the abode of that Rākshasa. Son unto Viçravana
and brother unto Vaiçravana, the Rākshasa named Rāvana resides in the
city of Lankā. And the lovely city of Lankā, reared by Viçwakarma, lieth
a full hundred _yojanas_ hence on an island in the sea; furnished with
golden gateways, filled with variegated daises, lordly gold-gleaming
palaces; and girt round with great walls hued like sunshine. There
stayeth Vaidehi, forlorn and clad in a silken cloth,—confined in the
inner apartment of Rāvana, and carefully guarded by Rākshasis. In Lankā
protected all round by the sea, ye shall behold Janaka’s daughter,
Maithili. At the end of the ocean after a full hundered _yojanas_,
arriving at its southern shore, ye shall see Rāvana. Ye monkeys, do ye
hie thither speedily with vigor. I perceive by my knowledge that having
seen (that place), ye shall come back. The first course belongs to
fork-tailed shrikes and others living on grain; the second, to those
that live on animals and fruits; the third is ranged by Bhāshas; the
fourth by Kraunchas, Kuvaras and hawks; the fifth by vultures; the sixth
belongs to swans endowed with youth and beauty; and the next to the
Vainateyas. We have derived our origin from Vainateya.¹⁸³ (By
despatching you thither), I shall avenge the heinous deed perpetrated by
the cannibal, as well as the wrong done by Rāvana unto my brother.
Resting here, I see Rāvana and Jānaki. We have excellent _Sauparna_¹⁸⁴
clairvoyance. For this reason, as well as owing to the energy consequent
on our feeding on certain kinds of flesh, we, ye monkeys, can see a
little further than an hundred _yojanas_. Therefore (the Deity) hath
ordained such food for us as are fraught with the power of making one
see from a great distance. And the abode of cocks and others being
underneath trees, their sight is limited to the extent which they
require to see. Do ye look about for means to cross over the salt
waters. Having met with Vaidehi, do ye, having achieved success, come
back. I wish to be taken by you to the ocean—abode of Varuna. I will
offer water unto (the manes of) my high-souled brother, who hath gone to
heaven." Thereat those heroes, the monkeys possessed of exceeding
energy, carried to the destined spot on the shore of the ocean, Sampāti,
whose wings had been scathed. Then carrying that lord of vultures back
to the self-same place, the monkeys, furnished with information
(concerning Sitā), experienced great joy.

  ¹⁸² _i. e._ the worlds enveloped by his three steps during his Dwarf
      Incarnation.—T.

  ¹⁸³ Aruna, son unto Vinatā.—T.

  ¹⁸⁴ Clairvoyance attained by success in knowledge respecting the
      spiritual Golden eyes. Thus far the commentator. We leave the
      abstruse point to the apostles of theosophy and spiritism for
      illucidation.—T.




## SECTION LIX.


Then hearing that ambrosial speech of the vulture-king, the
monkey-chiefs, being delighted, kept on parleying (on that topic). Then
Jambavān—foremost of monkeys—together with all the monkeys, arising
suddenly from the ground spoke unto the vulture-king, saying,—"Where is
Sitā? By whom hath she been seen? And who hath carried away Mithilā’s
daughter? Do thou tell ue all about this, and (thus) prove the path of
those rangers of the woods. Who is there that doth not take heed of the
force of Dāçarathi’s¹⁸⁵ and Lakshmana’s arrows, speeding with the
vehemence of thunder?" Thereat, cheering up those monkeys, who had risen
from their attitudes of fasting, and who were all attention to hear news
concerning Sitā, he (Sampāti), well pleased, said these words,—"Listen
as to how I came to know of the ravishment of Vaidehi, Sitā, at this
place; and who it was that told me where that one of expansive eyes is.
For a long time I lay here, old, and of feeble life and energy. That
best of birds, my son named Supārçwa, coming to me, at the proper hour
maintained me with food. Gandharbas are exceedingly lascivious; serpents
are exceedingly wrathful; fear is excessive in deer; and we have
excessive hunger. Once on a time my son, going forth about sunrise to
procure food for me who was suffering from hunger and (accordingly)
eager for it, came back in the evening without any flesh. Hurt (by my
speech uttered) in consequence of my non-receipt of food, that enhancer
of my joy, asking my forgiveness, said these words fraught with
fact,—’Father, taking to my wings at the proper time for procuring
flesh, I (went) and stood, obstructing the pass of the Mahendra
mountain. There stood I looking down, obstructing the way of thousands
of creatures ranging the sea. There I saw somebody resembling a mass of
crushed collyrium, going away, taking a female resembling the rising sun
in splendour. Seeing them, I had made up my mind that they should serve
for thy fare, when he humbly in a pacific manner begged for way. Even
among the mean, there is none on earth that can slay people who assume a
mild attitude. What shall I say, alas! of superior ones like myself? And
summoning celerity, he went on as if pushing off the sky by his energy.
Then the rangers of the air and other beings worshipped me. And the
Maharshis said unto me,—_By luck it is that Sitā is still living_¹⁸⁶
—_He together with a female, having passed by thee, certainly augurs
good fortune unto thee_.¹⁸⁷ —Then those eminently handsome Siddhas spoke
thus unto me.—_This is Rāvana, the king of the Rākshasas_, said they
unto me. And I (stood), beholding the wife of Rāma, son unto
Daçaratha,—throwing off her ornaments and silken apparel, overwhelmed by
might of sorrow, with hair dishevelled crying out the names of Rāma and
Lakshmana. This O father, is the reason of my passing the time.’ That
best of those skilled in speech, Supārçwa, said all this unto me. Even
hearing of this, I could not think of putting forth prowess. How can a
bird bereft of wings, undertake any thing? But listen! I will tell you
as to what I am capable of through speech, intellect and merit, and what
ye can exert your manliness in. I will do what is agreeable unto you by
my words and my intention. That which is Dāçarathi’s work is also mine.
Of this there is no doubt. Ye, foremost in intelligence, strong,
intellectual, and incapable of being overcome by the gods themselves,
have been despatched by the monarch of monkeys. And Rāma’s and
Lakshmana’s shafts furnished with the feathers of the Kanka, are
competent to afflict or save the three worlds. And although the
Ten-necked one is endowed with strength and energy, yet to you who are
competent, nothing is hard to accomplish. There is no need of delay.
Make up your minds. Persons like you do not give way to laziness in
enterprise."

  ¹⁸⁵ _Lit._ Daçaratha’s son. The term it applied in especial to
      Rāma.—T.

  ¹⁸⁶ The commentator supplies the elipsis thus,—"_Coming within thy
      ken_ by luck, Sitā is living."

  ¹⁸⁷ The passage is obscure. The commentator has glossed over this
      _sloka_, and the meaning is none the clearer for his
      explanation.—T.




## SECTION LX.


When the vulture had offered oblations of water unto the manes of his
deceased brother and finished his ablutions, the monkey-chiefs sat down
in that charming mountain, surrounding him. And inspired with confidence
(in the words of the Niçākara), Sampāti, from delight, said unto Angada,
who was seated, surrounded by all the monkeys,— "Remaining silent, do
ye, ye monkeys, needfully hear what I say. I will tell you truly how I
came to know Maithili. My body being affected by solar heat, and my
wings burnt by the rays of the sun, O sinless one, I formerly fell to
this summit of Vindhya. On regaining my senses after six nights, during
which I was insensible, I looked around in bewilderment, but could not
recognise anything whatever. Then closely viewing oceans and mountains,
rivers and tanks, and woods and countries, my thoughts came back to me.
And seeing this place abounding in cheerful birds, containing woods and
crested with summits, I for certain concluded it to be Vindhya on the
shores of the Southern sea. And here lay a sacred asylum, honored even
by the celestials, and here dwelt a saint named Niçākara, of fierce
austerities. And after Niçākara cognizant of virtue had gone to heaven,
I bereft of that saint, passed eight thousand years in this mountain.
Descending with difficulty from the uneven top of Vindhya, I again
came¹⁸⁸ to the earth covered with sharp-pointed grass. I was eager to
see the saint; and (therefore), with much ado I came to him; and Jatāyu
and myself saw that saint many a time and oft. A fragrant breeze blew
about the hermitage; and no tree was found that did not bear flowers and
fruits. Approaching the holy asylum, I, desirous of beholding the
worshipful Niçākara, waited at the foot of a tree. Then at a distance I
saw the saint, flaming in energy and irrepressible,—returning
northwards. And as creatures gather round a giver, bears and _Srimaras_,
tigers, lions, and various reptiles, were going along, surrounding him.
And knowing that the saint had arrived (at his home), the animals went
away, as go away forces together with counsellors, when the sovereign
hath entered (his palace).—The saint was glad on seeing me. Then
re-entering his asylum for a short space, he came out and enquired for
my mission. ’O mild one, in consequence of thy feathers having undergone
alteration, I cannot recognise thee. Thy two wings have been blasted by
fire; and thy powers in thy frail frame are (in the same condition).
Aforetime I saw two vultures like unto wind in speed,—kings of vultures,
brothers, wearing shapes at will. Thou art I know, elder, O Sampāti; and
Jatāyu is younger to thee. Assuming human forms, you had taken hold of
my feet. Now, what ailment hath attacked thee? And why have thy plumes
fallen off? And who hath dealt this punishment unto thee? Do thou tell
all this unto me, who am asking thee’."

  ¹⁸⁸ While the saint was staying here.—T.




## SECTION LXI.


Thereat Sampati related unto the ascetic all about his fearful,
arduous,and rash act of following up the sun. ’"O reverend sire, in
consequence of my body suffering from sores, I, my senses bewildered
from shame, and myself fatigued, cannot utter words. From pride for
power of flight, I and Jatāyu, being intoxicated by conceit, began to
voyage the sky afar off, with the view of testing each other’s prowess,
binding ourselves by the vow that we would follow the Sun so long as he
did not enter that mighty Setting mountain,—and appear before the
ascetics on the summit of Kailāçya. And simultaneously plunging (into
the aerial deep) we saw on the earth beneath separate cities resembling
car-wheels; and here the sound of musical instruments; and there the
tinklings of ornaments. And (at places) we beheld many a damsel clad in
red attire, engaged in singing. And swiftly darting up into the sky and
approaching the path of the Sun, we saw a wood interspersed with swards.
And we saw the earth covered with crags and masses of rocks, and
intersected by streams resembling threads. And Himavān, and Vindhya, and
that mighty mountain, Meru, appeared on the earth like elephants in a
tank. Then we began to sweat, and to be filled with regret; and fear
seized us both. And we became bewildered; and fainted away
frightfully.¹⁸⁹ And we knew not the south, or the west, or the quarter
presided over by Fire;¹⁹⁰ and the world that was still burning at the
end of a yuga, appeared (unto us) as if it had been consumed quite.¹⁹¹
And my mind, combined with my eyes waxed feebler. And then fixing with
might and main my eyes as well as my mind (on the sun), I could by a
violent exercise of my energy behold the sun. And the sun shining,
appeared unto us like the earth in extent. Then, without asking me
Jatāyu dropped to the earth. Seeing him, I at once descended from the
sky and Jatāyu was not burnt in consequence of having been shielded by
my wings. And scathed through the agitation¹⁹² I fell through the aerial
way. I guessed that Jatāyu fell in Janasthāna. And I myself, my wings
blasted, and rendered inert, fell on Vindhya. Deprived of my kingdom,
and my brother, and my wings, and my prowess, I wishing to put a period
to my existence, will hurl myself headlong from this summit of the
mountain."

  ¹⁸⁹ Consequent on Jatāyu having dropped down.—T.

  ¹⁹⁰ South-east.—T.

  ¹⁹¹ The passage is obscure. This is however, all the explanation that
      the commentator has to give.—T.

  ¹⁹² Rāmanuya comments: "the confusion seized them as the sun was
      midway. They lost ail sense of direction. The faint succeeded".—T.




## SECTION LXII.


Having said this unto that foremost of ascetics, I smitten with grief,
began to weep. Thereat, after, reflecting for a while, that reverend one
said,—"Thy wings together with two smaller ones shall grow again; as
also thy sight, energy, prowess and strength. And having heard of it,
and also seen it through ascetic power, I know that a great deed is
going to take place. There shall be a king named Daçaratha, increaser of
the Ikshwāku race. He shall have a son, named Rāma, endowed with
exceeding energy. And he (Rāma) shall repair to the forest in company
with his brother, Lakshmana; that one having truth for prowess, having
been commissioned to that effect by his sire. A fiend named Rāvana, the
lord of Rākshasas, incapable of being slain by either the gods or the
Dānavas, shall carry off his (Rāma’s) spouse in Janasthāna. And albeit
tempted by viands and objects of enjoyment and desire, the famous and
highly virtuous one, plunged in grief, shall not pertake of those
things. And knowing that Videha’s daughter (hath been fasting for many a
day), Vāsava shall offer Vaidehi _pāyaça_ like unto ambrosia, difficult
of being procured even by the gods. Receiving that food, Maithili,
knowing that it hath come from Indra,¹⁹³ took up a little of it from the
surface, and dropped it to the earth for Rāma. Whether my husband as
well as his younger brother live, or they have attained godhead, let
this food serve for them.’ Rāma’s envoys, having been despatched
thither,¹⁹⁴ shall come hither. Thou shouldst relate unto them all the
facts connected with the queen of Rāma. Do not by any means go hence;
and in this case, whither, again, wilt thou repair? Do thou stay here
for season and place. Thou shalt regain thy wings. I could this very day
furnish thee with wings. But, by staying here in this condition, thou
wilt be able to compass the welfare of the worlds. Even thou shalt do
that act in behalf of those sons of the king, of the Brāhmanas, of the
spiritual preceptors, of the ascetics, and of Vasava. I also am desirous
of beholding the brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana. I do not wish to hold
this life long. I would renounce my life.’ That Maharshi, conversant
with the nature of things, told me this."

  ¹⁹³ From the fact of the food not touching the earth, and other signs.
      It is humorous to read the explanation of the commentator as to
      the reason of Indra’s supplying Sitā with food. "If Sitā remained
      fasting, Rāvana would forego his attachment for Vaidehi, on seeing
      her altered appearance; and thus his destruction could not take
      place. Further, if he saw Sitā retaining her former loveliness, he
      could conclude that Sitā, as also Rāma, were superhuman character,
      and that as such they could not be agents for his destruction
      according to the prophecy "Rāvana shall be slain by a human
      being." This inducing him to persist in his bellicose attitude
      towards Rāma, would bring down rain upon his head."—T.

  ¹⁹⁴ For going to Lankā.—T.




## SECTION LXIII.


Having praised me with these and many other words, and bidden me adieu
that one skilled in speech, entered his own habitation. Issuing out
gently from the cave of that mountain, I, ascending Vindhya, was
expecting you. The space covered by the time intervening between then
and to-day is a little over an hundred years;¹⁹⁵ and laying up in my
heart the speech of that ascetic, I have been awaiting season and place.
Setting out on his great journey, on Niçākara having gone to heaven, I
distracted with various thoughts, have been consumed by grief.¹⁹⁶ My
rising intention of doing away with myself I have suppressed in
consideration of the words of the ascetic. The reason which he had
imparted unto me for preserving my life, hath removed my pains, even as
a flaming fire (dispells darkness). And knowing the prowess of the
impious Rāvana, I said in rage to my son, versed in speech,—’Hearing her
lamentation, and knowing them¹⁹⁷ bereft of Sitā, why didst thou not
deliver her?’ My son did not do this good office unto Daçaratha,
influenced by affection for him." As he was speaking thus in the midst
of the monkeys, his wings sprang up in presence of the rangers of the
forest. Thereupon, seeing his person furnished with grown pinions hued
like the infant sun, he experienced incomparable raptures, and addressed
the monkeys, saying,— "By the grace of that Rāyarshi of immeasurable
energy, my wings, which had been burnt up by the rays of the sun, have
grown again. To-day I have got (back) the strength and prowess which I
possessed while my youth was yet present. Do ye strive every way. Ye
shall meet with Sitā. And my getting (back) my wings inspires (us) with
confidence as to success." Having said this unto all the monkeys, that
ranger of the sky and best of birds. Sampāti, anxious to ascertain his
power of flight, flew up from the mountain summits. Hearing his words,
those powerful monkeys, with vigour (enhanced), seeing success before
them, felt the height of joy. Then those foremost of monkeys, in vigor
resembling the Wind, getting occasion for displaying their prowess,
intent wpon searching the Janaka’s daughter, set forward towards the
quarter crested by Abhijit.¹⁹⁸

  ¹⁹⁵ The commentator says "The period is one hundred and eight
      years."—T.

  ¹⁹⁶ For the loss of my plumage.—T.

  ¹⁹⁷ Rāma and Lakshmana.—T.

  ¹⁹⁸ _Abhijitābhimukhān (acc.) Abhijit_—the name of a star. _Abhijit_
      may also mean—he who is to be conquered. Then the sense would be,
      "the region in which Rāvana was."—T.




## SECTION LXIV.


Having heard all this related to them by the vulture-king, the monkeys
possessing the strength of lions, filled with delight, bounded and set
up a roar. Hearing from Sampāti that Rāvana was to be slain, the monkeys
growing glad, came to the ocean, with the desire of seeing Sitā. And
coming to that country, these ones prossessing dreadful prowess, beheld
(the sea) reflecting the image of this entire mighty world. And arriving
at the northern side of the Southern sea, those exceedingly powerful
heroic monkeys took up their quarters there. And seeing the sea, here as
if asleep, there, as if playful, and at another place with surges
measuring mountains; and thronged with the foremost Dānavas inhabiting
the nether regions; and capable of causing one’s hair to stand on end,
those powerful monkeys were seized with sadness. And seeing the sea,
incapable of being crossed even as the sky, all the monkeys began to
lament, saying,—"What is to be done?" And that best of monkeys—
(Angada), seeing the army cast down because of the sight of the sea,
began to comfort the monkeys, afflicted with fear. "We should not
indulge in grief. Grief is injurious.— Grief destroys a person even as a
wrathful serpent doth a boy. He that, when the time is come for
displaying his prowess, indulges in sorrow, growing weak in energy,
fails to attain his object." That night having passed away, Angada in
company with the monkeys, joined by the old ones, again took counsel
with them. And that monkey-host surrounding Angada, resembled the host
of Maruts environing Vāsava. Who save Vāli’s son (stationed) at one
place and at another Hanumān, could be capable of stilling that force?
Then saluting the elders as well as the army, the graceful Angada—
repressor of foes—spoke words fraught with sense,—"What person, endued
with exceeding energy, shall now leap over the main? Who shall serve
that subduer of enemies, Sugriva, ever intent on truth? What monkey can
leap over an hundred _yojanas_? Who shall deliver leaders of herds from
a mighty fear? By whose favor shall we, crowned with success and
rendered happy, returning from this place, shall behold our wives and
our sons, and our homes? By whose favor shall we joyfully meet Rāma, and
the mighty Lakshmana, and that dweller in the woods, Sugriva? If any
monkey among you is competent to bound over the deep, let him at once
confer on us Dakshinā in the shape of deliverance from fear." Hearing
Angada’s speech, none said anything. And that host of monkeys wavered.
Then that foremost of monkeys again addressed those monkeys, saying,—All
of you are the foremost of strong ones, and of steady prowess. And ye
have sprung in blameless lines, and are ever honored (by the king). And
yet no one of you can promise to undertake this journey? Ye best of
monkeys, unfold your respective powers in bounding."




## SECTION LXV.


Hearing Angada’s speech, those foremost monkeys one after another began
to speak, touching their respective competence in coursing—Gaya, and
Gavāksha, and Gavaya, and Sarabha, and Gandhamādana, and Mainda, and
Dwivida, and Angada, and Jambavān. And Gaya said.—"I can leap over ten
_yojanas_" And Gavāksha said,—"I shall go twenty _yojanas_" And the
monkey Sarabha said to those monkeys,—"Ye monkeys, I shall go thirty
_yojanas_." And the monkey, Rhishava, said to those monkeys,—"I shall,
without doubt, go forty _yojanas_" And the exceedingly energetic monkey,
Gandhamādana, said,—"I shall, for certain go fifty _yojanas_." And the
monkey Mainda said unto the monkeys there,—"I shall undertake to leap
over sixty _yojanas_." And then the highly energetic Dwivida said,—"I
shall, for certain, go seventy _yojanas_. And the highly powerful
Sushena, possessed of strength—foremost of monkeys said— "I declare that
in motion I am equal to eighty _yojanas_." As they were speaking thus,
the oldest of them all, Jambavān, saluting them, answered—"Formerly we
had power of motion. But now we have waxed exceeding old. Although this
is so, yet we can not overlook this, as both Rāma and the monkey-king
(by sending us) have become sure of success. At present do thou
understand the course that is ours. I shall go ninety _yojanas_. There
is no doubt whatever about this." Jambavān said this unto those choice
monkeys. But (formerly) my prowess in leaping was forsooth not such.¹⁹⁹
Of old in the sacrifice of Virochana’s son, the eternal Lord Vishnu,
when he had covered the entire universe with three steps, was
circumambulated by me. But I who was all this, have waxed old, and my
vigor sits feebly upon me. In my youth, however, my strength was
exceeding great and incomparable. Now I can only by my own energy,
course thus far. But such a bound shall not bring success on our
undertaking. After this, saluting the mighty monkey, Jambavān, the wise
Angada spoke straight sense, saying,—"I can go over this mighty hundred
_yojanas_; but there is no certainty as to my power of returning."
Thereat, Jambavān, cognizant of speech, said unto that foremost of
monkeys,—"O foremost of leonine ones, we know thy power of motion, thou
art capable of coursing a hundred thousand _yojanas_, as well as of
coming back. But we say that even this is what is fit. My child, the
master must on no account be commanded by his servants. O foremost of
monkeys, all these should be commanded by thee. Thou art our spouse, and
(at the same time) occupying the position of our husband. The master is
the spouse of the army. This is the way of the world, O repressor of
foes! O subduer of enemies, thou art the root of this business.
Therefore, my child, thou shouldest always be maintained by us like a
wife. The root of any work must be preserved. This is the policy of
those versed in business. The root existing, all the virtues, obtaining
fruit, certainly meet with suceess. Thou, O thou having truth for
prowess art the instrument of this undertaking, and, O subduer of
enemies, furnished with sense and vigor, thou art the occasion herein.
And, O foremost of monkeys, thou art both our superior, and our
superior’s son; and resorting to thee we are enabled to accomplish our
object." Thereat that mighty monkey, Angada, son unto Vāli, answered the
exceedingly wise Jambavān, when he had spoken,—"If I go not, nor any
other powerful monkey, then we should for certain again sit ourselves
down to fast unto death. Without doing the mandate of the intelligent
lord of monkeys, we, repairing thither, shall not behold ourselves
alive. He is extreme both in showing favor and in anger. Disregarding
his order, we shall, going there, meet with destruction And his ire
shall, not take any other course. Therefore it behoves thee, capable of
seeing issues, to reflect." Thus addressed by Angada that powerful and
heroic monkey Jambavān answered Angada in excellent words, saying,—"That
business, O hero, shall not moult a feather. I shall despatch even him
who shall bring about success."—Then that heroic monkey ordered the
foremost of monkeys, the highly heroic monkey Hanumān, who stood apart,
convinced (of the wisdom of Jambavān’s decision.)

  ¹⁹⁹ _i. e._ it was greater.—T.




## SECTION LXVI.


Surveying the monkey-host consisting of many hundreds and
thousands,—crest-fallen, Jambavān thus spake unto Hanumān,—"O hero among
the monkey-multitude, best of those versed in all branches of learning,
staying apart in silent, why dost thou not speak? O Hanumān, thou art
alike in energy and strength, equal to Sugriva, monarch of monkeys, and
to Rāma and Lakshmana. Arishtanemi’s son, the mighty Vainateya,²⁰⁰
famous by the cognomen of Garutroin, is the foremost of birds. Many a
time and oft I have seen that exceedingly powerful, mighty-armed one,
endowed with strength of will,—raise up serpents in the ocean. The
strength that is in his wings is equal to the might and virtue of thy
arm. Thy energy and prowess are not surpassed by him. And thy strength,
and thy understanding, thy energy, and thy vigour, O foremost of
monkeys, (is known among all creatures). Why dost not thou prepare
thyself furnished with everything that is noble or great, (for this
feat)? That foremost of Apsarās,—the famous Punjikathalā, more famed
under the name of Anjanā, is the spouse of the monkey Kesarin. Famed
over the three worlds, and incomparable on earth by virtue of her
beauty, by an imprecation, my son, she was born in the monkey-race,
capable of wearing shapes at her will. Once on a time, that daughter of
the high-souled lord of monkeys, Kunjara,—endeued with youth and
beauty,— decked in a delightful garland, and clad in silk, —assuming a
human form, was ranging on the summit of a mountain, resembling a mass
of clouds in the rainy season. And it came to pass that as that one of
expansive eyes was standing on the summit of the mount, the Wind gently
stole away her elegant yellow cloth with crimson skirts. And he had a
sight of her fair and fine face, together with her well-developed
breasts. And soon as the Wind saw that illustrious one of spacious hips
and slender waist, and whose every limb was lovely,— he was amain
overcome by desire. And all his frame possessed by _Manmatha_, and
deprived of self, the Wind embraced that blameless one by means of his
long arms. Thereat, influenced by fear, that one of excellent vows
said,— ’Who is it that desireth to lay violent hands upon my chastity?’
Hearing Anjanā’s words, the Wind answered,— ’I do not wrong thee, O thou
of shapely hips. Let not fear enter thy heart. As, O famous damsel, by
embracing thee, I have mentally entered into thy womb, thou shalt bear a
son, intelligent and endeued with prowess. And, gifted with great
strength, and possessing exceeding energy, and having vast vigor, he
shall equal me in bounding and leaping.’ Thus addressed, O mighty
monkey, thy mother, O long-armed one, O foremost of monkeys, gave birth
to thee in a cave. And in that mighty forest, thou, a child, desirous of
eating, seeing the Sun risen, and taking him to be a fruit, sprang up
and leaped into the sky. And, O mighty monkey, going three thousand
_yojanas_, thou, struck by his energy, didst not feel poverty of spirit.
And, seeing thee rushing through the heavens, O mighty monkey, Indra,
growing wroth, hurled his thunder-bolt at thee. Thereat, breaking thy
left jaw, thou (didst fall) on the mountain-top. From this circumstance,
thy name hath been known as _Hanumān_.²⁰¹ Witnessing thee beaten back,
that bearer of perfumes himself, the Wind, that breaketh everything
before him. in wrath did not blow through the three worlds. Thereat, all
the gods—lords of the universe—influenced by fear in consequence of the
triune world waxing agitated, began to pacify the wrathful Wind. And on
the Wind being mollified, Brahmā conferred on him a boon, saying,—’O
child, O thou of true prowess, (thy son) shall be incapable of being
slain in battle by means of weapons.’ And seeing him²⁰² sustain no
(serious) injury consequent on the impact of the thunder-bolt, He of a
thousand eyes, pleased in his soul, also conferred on (thee) an
excellent boon, O lard, saying,—’Thy death shall take place according to
thy will.’ Thou, endowed with dreadful vigor, art the son of Kesari by
his wife; and, resembling the Wind in energy, thou hast sprung from his
loins. Thou art the son of the Wind, my child—equal to him in the power
of leaping. Now we are without our lives. And now thou, endowed with
dexterity and vigor, and like another king of the monkeys,²⁰³ art before
us. On the occasion of Vishnu’s enveloping the earth with three steps,
I, O child, had circumambulated the earth with her mountains, woods and
forests, one and twenty times. Then, commissioned by the gods, we had
gathered annuals, which being cast on the deep, caused ambrosia to come
out after churning. At that time, great was our strength. But now I have
grown old, and my prowess hath left me. At present we have thee,
furnished with every virtue. Therefore, possessed of vigor, do thou
bestir thyself, and bound over (the main). Thou art the most qualified
of all. This entire monkey host is eager to behold thy prowess. O
redoubtable monkey, do thou arise! Do thou leap over the mighty ocean.
Thy motion, Hanumān, surpasseth that of all beings. All the monkeys are
depressed. Why, O Hanumān, dost thou overlook this? Put forth thy vigor,
O thou endowed with mighty vehemence, like Vishnu crossing over the
three worlds in three steps." Exhorted by the foremost of monkeys, that
one famed for his speech, that monkey,the offspring of the Wind-god,
gladdening the monkey-hosts, wore (a fit) shape for crossing the
ocean.²⁰⁴

  ²⁰⁰ Offspring uf Vinatā, Garuda’s mother.—T.

  ²⁰¹ _Hanu_—means _jaw_. _Hanumān_ means—_he with the (fractured) jaw.—
      T._

  ²⁰² Hanumān.—T.

  ²⁰³ Sugriva.—T.

  ²⁰⁴ Here is another epithet of Hanumān—_Pavamātmaja_—son unto the
      Wind-god. Left out on the score of redundency.—T.




## SECTION LXVII.


Seeing that foremost of monkeys enlarge his person for crossing over an
hundred _yojanas_, and suddenly filled with energy,(the monkeys) at once
renounced sorrow, and, filled with delight, set up ululations and fell
to eulogizing the mighty Hanumān. And, struck with amazement,they,
(staying) all round, joyfully gazed (at him); even as creatures beheld
Nārāyana, when stretching forth his three steps, he prepared himself
(for the succeeding feat). And, eulogized by them, the wondrous mighty
Hanumān increased; and, flourishing his tail from joy, attained
strength. And as, extolled by the principal elderly monkeys, he became
fraught with effulgence, his beauty was great. As a lion fills himself
with vigor in an open cave, so the son of the Wind-god filled himself
with energy. And the face of him, as that intelligent one was filling
himself with force, was aflame like a frying-pan, or like unto fumeless
fire. Rising in the midst of the monkeys, Hanumān with his down standing
on end through joy, saluting the aged monkeys, said,—"Wind, the friend
of Fire, shattereth mountain-summits; and, ever blowing in the eye of
the sky, he is possessed of strength, and is of immeasurable (might).
Begot from his loins, I am the son of the fast-coursing and high-souled
Wind, coursing swiftly. I am his equal in all these accomplishments²⁰⁵.
I can, without once stopping, circumambulate the extensive and
heaven-cleaving mountain, Meru, for a thousand times. And, dashing the
ocean with my arms, I can deluge the world with its mountains, rivers
and lakes. Lashed by the force of my legs and thighs, that abode of
Varuna, the sea, out which have sprung the ferocious aquatic animals,
overleaps its continents. And for once that lord of birds, Vinatā’s
offspring, living on serpents, courseth through the welkin, I can course
through it a thousand times. And I can touch the flaming effulgent Sun
ere, beginning his journey from the Rising hill, he ascends the Setting
hill. And, ye foremost of monkeys, I can, fiercely rushing on, come
again without touching the earth. And I can bound beyond stars and
planets, suck up the oceans, and rive the earth. And a monkey, I can,
leaping, crush mountains; and, leaping, I can drain the mighty ocean
dry. And, when I shall leap in the sky, flowers from various shrubs and
trees shall follow me to-day. And then my course, (flecked with
flowers), shall resemble even the sky (studded with stars). And, ye
monkeys, then all creatures shall see me, now ranging through the
profound firmament, now shooting up, and now descending on the other
shore). Resembling Mahāmeru, me ye shall behold, ye monkeys, making my
way, covering up the sky, as if devouring up the heavens. I shall,
leaping and concentrating my energy, scatter the clouds, shake the
hills, and suck up the ocean. The strength of Vinatā’s son, or the
Wind-god’s, or mine, (surpasses that of every other creature). None save
the sovereign of birds, or the exceedingly mighty Wind, can follow me in
flight. In the twinkling of an eye I shall spread through the
unsupported sky, like lightning darting from clouds. And at the time of
leaping over the ocean, my form shall resemble that of the energizing
Vishnu, when He had assumed the triune energy. I perceive through my
intelligence, (and my mental motion tallies), that I shall behold
Vaidehi. Therefore, ye monkeys, rejoice. In vehemence like unto Garuda,
I shall, I conceive, go an _Ayuta yojanas_. I can, suddenly summoning
energy, bring hither ambrosia from the very grasp of Vāsava or Brahmā,
himself.²⁰⁶ I shall leap sheer over Lankā. Even this is my impression."
Filled with delight, the monkeys there amazed see that foremost of
monkeys, endued with immeasurable might, storming. And, hearing his
speech capable of removing the grief of kindred, that best of monkeys
Jambavān, transported with joy, said,—"O hero! O son of Kesari! O
offspring of the Wind! the huge sorrow of thy kindred hath, my child,
been destroyed by thee. And these foremost of monkeys assembled, who
wish for thy welfare, shall, with intent minds, perform acts tending to
thy weal,—so that thou mayst succeed in thy undertaking. And by the
grace of the saints, and with the permission of the aged monkeys, and by
the blessing of the superiors, do thou bound over the mighty main. Till
thou return, we shall stay on one leg.²⁰⁷ The lives of all these rangers
of the forest shall go along with thee." Then that tiger-like monkey
said unto those rangers of the woods,—"None in this world would be able
to sustain my impetus in the act of bounding. Here are these summits,
firm and spacious, of this mountain, Mahendra, thronged with crags. I
shall rush forward from these summits of Mahendra, interspersed with
trees and adorned with masses of ore. And as I leap over a hundred
_yojanas_, these mighty summits shall sustain my impetus." Then he
equalling the Wind, that monkey, the son of the Wind-god, pounder of
enemies, ascended that best of mountains, Mahendra; covered with various
trees and flowers, furnished with swards; ranged by deer; containing
plants and blossoms with trees bearing fruits and flowers daily; having
tigers and lions and infuriated elephants; swarming with maddened birds;
and abounding with fountains. Ascending (Mahendra), that foremost of
monkeys endeued with exceeding strength, and resembling Mahendra himself
in prowess, began to range from one mighty summit to another. Thereat,
hurt by the arms of that high-souled one, that mighty mountain began to
cry,²⁰⁸ like a mighty mad elephant tormented by a lion. And water rushed
out of masses of rocks scattered around. And that mighty mountain had
its deer and elephants afflicted with afright; and its giant trees
shaken: and its spacious uplands deserted by various Gandharva couples
engaged in drinking and dalliance, and by birds flying away, and by
bevies of Vidyādharas; and its huge serpents distressed, and its cliffs
and peaks toppling down. And with its serpents hissing, with their
bodies half issuing (from their holes), the mountain seemed as if it
shone with pennons displayed. And the heap of crags forsaken by saints
exercised with fear and agitation, looked doleful, like a wayfarer left
in a vast forest by his companions. And that intelligent, magnanimous
and heroic monkey—destroyer of hostile heroes,—endowed with speed,
concentrating his soul on his energy, mentally went to Lankā.

  ²⁰⁵ _i. e._ pertaining to leaping.—T.

  ²⁰⁶ Vāsava, Indra, carries celestial ambrosia, and Brahmā, that which
      is the aliment in _Yoga_—or spiritual rapture.—T.

  ²⁰⁷ _i. e._ practise austerities on thy behalf.—T.

  ²⁰⁸ Through the voices of the animals inhabiting it. — T.

END OF KISHKINDHAKANDAM.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RĀMĀYANA, VOLUME 2. KISHKINDHĀ KĀNDAM ***