---
id: 23    
title: "Corpus: Manmath Nath - Ramayana 3 - Āranya Kāndam"
layout: single
toc_sticky: true
permalink: /manmathnath-ramayana-3
date: 2024-01-12
tags: [Corpus]
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/banners/corpus-banner.jpg
  # overlay_image: /assets/images/projects/Sarcasm-Detection-System-for-Hinglish-Language.jpg
  # overlay_filter: 0 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
author_profile: false
last_modified_at: 2024-01-12T15:46:43-04:00
toc: True  
toc_sticky: False
mathjax: "true"
sidebar:
   nav: "docs"
---

# The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Rāmāyana, Volume 2. Āranya Kāndam
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook. 

Title: The Rāmāyana, Volume 2. Āranya, Kishkindhā, and Sundara Kāndam

Creator: Valmiki

Translator: Manmatha Nath Dutt

Release date: August 31, 2018 [eBook #57826]

Language: English

Produced by James Simmons.

This file was produced from page images at the Internet Archive.

Transcriber’s Note


This book was transcribed from scans of several different copies of the original found at the Internet Archive. The typesetters of the original book represented the letter ā (with a macron above) as â (with circumflex above) when italicized, but this etext uses the macron throughout. Words in italics in this etext were italicized in the original book. I have corrected obvious misspellings but I’ve left variant spellings alone. Some words and names, like _yojana_ and _Garuda_, were spelled two different ways in the same text. I have spelled them consistently to avoid confusion.


                              THE RĀMĀYANA


  Translated into English Prose from the original Sanskrit of Valmiki


                             ĀRANYA KĀNDAM.

                        EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY

                       MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A.

                        Rector, Keshub Academy.

printed by Girish Chandra Chackravarti, Deva Press, 65/2, Beadon Street.
                             CALCUTTA. 1891

                         [All rights reserved.]


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RĀMĀYANA, VOLUME 2. ĀRANYA***

ĀRANYA KĀNDAM.   
SECTION I.   SECTION II.   SECTION III.   SECTION IV.   SECTION V.   SECTI0N VI.   SECTION VII.   SECTION VIII.   SECTION IX.   SECTION X.   SECTION XI.   SECTION XII.   SECTION XIII.   SECTION XIV.   SECTION XV.   SECTION XVI.   SECTION XVII.   SECTION XVIII.   SECTION XIX.   SECTION XX.   SECTION XXI.   SECTION XXII.   SECTION XXIII.   SECTION XXIV.   SECTION XXV.   SECTION XXVI.   SECTION XXVII.   SECTION XXVIII.   SECTION XXIX.   SECTION XXX.   SECTION XXXI.   SECTION XXXII.   SECTION XXXIII.   SECTION XXXIV.   SECTION XXXV.   SECTION XXXVI.   SECTION XXXVII.   SECTION XXXVIII.   SECTION XXXIX.   SECTION XL.   SECTION XLI.   SECTION XLII.   SECTION XLIII.   SECTION XLIV.   SECTION XLV.   SECTION XLVI.   SECTION XLVII.   SECTION XLVIII.   SECTION XLIX.   SECTION L.   SECTION LI.   SECTION LII.   SECTION LIII.   SECTION LIV.   SECTION LV.   SECTION LVI.   SECTION LVI.   SECTION LVII.   SECTION LVIII.   SECTION LIX.   SECTION LX.   SECTION LXI.   SECTION LXII.   SECTION LXIII.   SECTION LXIV.   SECTION LXV.   SECTION LXVI.   SECTION LXVII.   SECTION LXVIII.   SECTION LXIX.   SECTION LXX.   SECTION LXXI.   SECTION LXXII.   SECTION LXXIII.   SECTION LXXIV.   SECTION LXXV.   

# ĀRANYA KĀNDAM.

## SECTION I.

Entering the extensive forest of Dandaka, the irrepressible and
self-composed Rāma saw the collection of asylums belonging unto the
ascetics, strewn with Kuça and bark, and environed by spiritual energy;
incapable of being beheld; like the solar disc in the heavens,—the
refuge of all creatures—with their ornamented yards; filled with a great
many deer, and abounding in multitudes of birds; in which Apsarās always
danced and which they held in respect; (asylums) beauteous with spacious
rooms for fire-sacrifice, with sacrificial necessaries, deer-skins,
Kuça, faggots, water-pitchers, fruits and roots; surrounded by mighty
and sacred forest-trees; crowned with lucious fruits; honored with Vāli¹
and Homa²; holy; resounding with the sounds of Vedic recitations;
scattered with divers blossoms; and containing tanks filled with
lotuses; with ancient ascetics living on fruits and roots, having their
senses under control, wearing bark and black deer-skins, and possessing
the splendour of the sun or fire; and adorned by great and holy sages
living upon regulated fare. Beholding that collection of asylums
belonging unto the ascetics, resembling the regions of Brahmā, resonant
with the voices of Vedic recitations; and grateful; with highly pious
Brāhmanas versed in the Vedas,—the exceedingly energetic and graceful
Rāghava entered the same, having first unstrung his mighty bow.
Thereupon, seeing the righteous Rāma resembling the moon risen, as well
as Lakshmana and the illustrious Vaidehi, those Maharshis endeued with
spiritual intuition, came forward (to meet the incomers); and, having
uttered benedictions, those persons of rigid vows, received them. And
those dwellers of the wood, struck with wonder, beheld Rāma’s tender
grace and lovliness and elegance of dress. And struck with astonishment,
those inhabitants of the woods of pre-eminent piety saw Vaidehi,
Lakshmana and Rāma, with winkless eyes. And those persons of exalted
virtue, engaged in the welfare of all creatures, made Rāghava, their
guest, sit down in their thatched cottage. Then, having received Rāma
respectfully according to scriptural prescription, those virtuous ones
of eminent piety, resembling fire, procured water (for Rāma). And,
experiencing great delight, those high-souled ones, uttering
benedictions, procured wild fruits, flowers and roots; and, having
assigned an asylum (unto Rāma), those persons cognizant of
righteousness, said with joined hands, "Possessed of high fame, thou,
the protector of righteousness, art the refuge of these people. Thou
shoudst be honored and worshipped, being their king, holding the rod,
and their superior. O Rāghava, it is because he that governs his
subjects, is a fourth part of Indra himself, that the king, being bowed
down unto by all, enjoys the choicest things. And we, being in thy
dominions, ought to be protected by thee. Whether living in the city or
in the woods, thou, lord of men, art our sovereign. We have renounced
chastising others; and, O monarch, we have conquered our anger, and
subdued our passions. Therefore, even as a child in its mother’s womb
(should be protected by her), should we be protected by thee." Having
said this, they entertained Rāghava, along with Lakshmana, with fruits
and roots and flowers and diverse other edibles procurable in the woods.
In the same way, other ascetics of accomplished purposes, living lives
of integrity, duly pleased that lord, Rāma, resembling Vaiçyānara.

    ¹ Offerings to the spirits of air.—T.

    ² Burnt offerings, or oblations of clarified butter into the sacred
      fire, as an offering to the gods, accompanied with prayers or
      invocations.—T.




## SECTION II.


Having received the homage of the ascetics, Rāma about sun-rise, having
greeted them all, entered into the forest. And Rāma, followed by
Lakshmana, saw the heart of the forest abounding in various kinds of
beasts,—ranged by bears and tigers, with its trees and shrubs torn and
trampled, its pools turbid, and its birds crying. And, having in company
with Sitā arrived at that forest abounding in terrible beasts, Kākutstha
saw a man-eater, resembling a mountain-summit, emitting tremendous
roars, with hollow eyes, a huge face, frightful, having a deformed
belly, disgusting, dreadful, Cyclopean, mis-shapen, of a horrible sight,
clad in a tiger-skin, besmeared with fat, covered with blood, capable of
frightening all creatures, with his mouth widely extended, like unto the
Destroyer himself, and uttering loud shouts,—who stood piercing with his
iron dart three lions, four tigers, two leopards, four Prishatas, and
the huge tusked head of an elephant dripping fat. Having seen Rāma and
Lakshmana, as well as Sitā the daughter of Mithilā, he growing angry,
rushed (against them), like the Destroyer himself rushing against
creatures at the universal dissolution. Uttering a dreadful yell, and,
as if making the earth tremble, he took Vaidehi on his waist, and, going
a little distance, said, "O ye wearing bark and matted locks, O ye of
feeble strength, that accompanied by your (common) wife, have entered
the forest of Dandaka, bearing bows and arrows and scimitars, why, being
ascetics, do ye wish to associate with a (single) woman? Ye wicked
wretches, ye impious wights, who are ye that bring disgrace upon
ascetics? I am a Rākshasa, Virādha by name. This forest is my fastness.
Accoutred in arms, I range (here), feeding on the flesh of ascetics.
This transcendentally beauteous one shall be my wife. And in battle I
shall drink your blood, wretches that ye are." Hearing the wicked and
vaunting speech of the impious Virādha, as he said this, Janaka’s
daughter, Sitā, began to tremble from fear, like a plantain tree shaken
by the wind. Seeing the graceful Sitā on the waist of Virādha, Rāghava
with a blank countenance said unto Lakshmana, "O amiable one, behold the
daughter of king Janaka, my wife of pure ways, an illustrious princess
brought up in luxury—on Virādha’s waist O Lakshmana, what had been
wished for by Kaikeyi with reference to us, (hath taken place), and the
dear boon (that she had asked) hath born fruit. That far-sighted lady—my
second mother—who had not been satisfied with having secured the kingdom
in the interests of her son, and by whom I that was dear unto her above
all other creatures, had been banished to the woods, hath to-day her
wishes crowned with success. O Sumitra’s son, nothing can impart unto me
greater anguish than the touching of Vaidehi by another— which surpasses
my father’s demise and my having been deprived of the kingdom." As
Kākutstha with his eyes flooded with tears was speaking thus, Lakshmana
flying into a rage, spoke like unto a confined elephant: "Why dost thou,
O Kākutstha, being the lord of all creatures and resembling Vasava
himself,—and also backed by myself, thy servant,— grieve like one
forlorn? The earth shall drink the gore of this Rākshasa, Virādha, when
deprived of life, after he hath been slain with a shaft by my angry
self. That ire of mine which I had conceived against Bharata hankering
after the kingdom, will I discharge on Virādha; even as the weilder of
the thunder holt hurls his weapon at a hill. Let my mighty arrow
acquiring velocity from the speed imparted to it through the energy of
my arms, light on his huge breast, and force his life from forth his
body; and let him whirling (at length fall down to the earth).




## SECTION III.


Then Virādha again spoke filling the forest, “Do ye tell me who ask
you,—who are ye and whither are ye going?" Thereupon, the highly
energetic Rāma answered the Rākshasa with a flaming face, when he had
thus asked (Rāma)— that he belonged to the Ikshwāku race. “Know us that
are in ihe forest, for Kshatriyas of respectable character. I also am
anxious of knowing who thou art, that goest about the Dandakas." Virādha
answered Rāma having truth for his prowess, "Ah! I will tell thee, O
king. Do thou, O Rāghava understand! I am son unto Java, and my mother
is Satarhadā. All the Rākshasas of the earth have called me Virādha.
Having gratified Brahmā by my asceticism, I received (this boon) that
none in the world would be able lo slay me by mangling my body with
weapons. Forsaking this fair one, do ye renouncing all hope (of either
recovering her or vanquishing me), speedily flee away to that place
whence ye had come;—else I shall deprive you of your lives." Thereat,
Rāma with his eyes reddened through wrath replied unto that Rākshasa of
a deformed shape, the wicked Virādha—saying, “Little! shame on thee of
base purposes! Thou surely seekest thy own death; and (death) thou shall
get in battle. Stay! Thou escapest me not with life." Then stringing his
bow, Rāma, speedily aiming at the Rākshasa, pierced him with sharpened
shafts; and (then) from his bow-string let go seven shafts, having their
feathered parts plaited with gold, furnished with great velocity, and
coursing like Suparna or the wind. Thereat, resembling flames, those
arrows furnished with peacocks’ feathers, pierced Virādha’s body, and
fell to the earth, covered with blood. On being thus pierced, the
Rākshasa set Vaidehi down, and, upraising a dart, rushed in wrath
towards Rāma and Lakshmana. And sending forth a mighty roar, he took up
a dart resembling the banner of Sakra; and he then appeared like the
Destroyer³ with opening mouth. Then the brothers showered a blazing
volley of shafts on the Rākshasa, resembling the Destroyer himself. And
stationing himself at a spot, the Rākshasa, laughing terribly, yawned,
and as he yawned the flest-coursing shafts fell off from his person. And
by virtue of the bestowal of the boon (by Brahmā), the Rākshasa Virādha
drew up his vital energies, and, lifting up a pike, darted at the
descendants of Raghu. That best of those bearing arms cut off with two
arrows that dart resembling the thunder-bolt and flaming in the sky. And
the dart severed by the shafts of Rāma, fell to the earth, as falls a
crag severed by the thunderbolt. Thereat, swiftly raising up a sword,
resembling a black snake, each (of the Rāghavas) approached his
antagonist, and began to assail him hastily. Thus hard beset, that
terrible one, seizing them both with his arms, attempted to make away
with those foremost of men, who, however, retained their calmness.
Reading his purpose, Rāma spake unto Lakshmana, "Let the Rākshasa bear
us by this way. Not use of letting him. Sumatra’s son, let the Rākshasa
bear us wherever he likes. Even this, by which the ranger of the night
is proceeding, is our way." And lifting up (Rāma and Lakshmana) by his
might and prowess, as if they were striplings, that haughty ranger of
the night laid them on his shoulders. And having deposited the Rāghavas
on his ihoulders, Virādha—ranger⁴ of night—sending up dreadful shouts,
directed his course towards the forest. And he at length entered the
forest resembling a mighty mass of clouds, furnished with various kinds
of trees, picturesque with diverse species of birds, and abounding in
jackals, serpents and beasts.

    ³ The North-West Province text has an additional _Sloka_:—Having
      said this the graceful Lakshmana spoke unto Virādha as if
      jestingly, "Who art thou that going to the forest, art ranging it
      so pleasantly?"—T.

    ⁴ The text has _Kalantakoyamopame_—_abl._—resembling _Kala_,
      _Antaka_, or _Yama_. The commentator cites a _sloka_, which
      assigns three several functions to the three,—_Kala_ executes his
      office on the occasion of the separation of life from the body;
      _Antaka_ compasses the end; and _Yama_ finally sits in judgment
      upon the departed soul. But this strikes me as misplaced
      erudition. I, however, give the commonsense rendering.—T.

    ⁵ Another reading is:—_That ranger of the night laid on his
      shoulders, those ones, who were puffed up with their exceeding
      prowess._—T.




## SECTION IV.


Seeing those foremost of Raghus, the Kākutsthas, carried away, Sitā
cried in a loud voice, raising up her arms,⁵ "Rāma, the son of
Daçaratha, the strong, the truthful and the pure, is, along with
Lakshmana, being carried away by you, Rākshasa of a terrible appearance.
Me bears will devour and tigers and panthers. Renouncing the Kākutsthas,
do thou carry me away. I bow unto thee, O best of Rākshasas." Hearing
these words of Vaidehi, Rāma and Lakshmana bestirred themselves for
compassing the death of that wicked one. And Sumitra’s son broke his
left arm; while Rāma at once broke the Rākshasa’s right one. On his arms
being broken, the Rākshasa resembling a mass of clouds, growing weak,
sank down on the ground in a swoon, like a hill riven by the
thunderbolt. Thereupon, they assailed the Rākshasa with their fists,
arms and feet; and lifting him up once and again, and pressing him, they
trod on him over the ground. Although he was sore pierced by full many
an arrow and cut sorryly by scimitars, and pressed down on the earth in
various ways, yet the Rākshasa expired not. Seeing him utterly incapable
of being killed, and resembling a hill, that inspirer of hope in times
of peril, the graceful (Rāma), said, "O foremost of men, in consequence
of his austerities, yon Rākshasa cannot be vanquished with weapons in
conflict. Therefore, let us cast him into a pit. O Lakshmana, dig a
capacious pit in this forest⁶ for this Rākshasa resembling an elephant,
terible, and of a grim presence." Having said this unto Lakshmana,—"Do
thou dig a pit," the powerful Rāma remained planting his foot on
Virādha’s throat. Having heard Rāghava’s words, the Rākshasa spake
gently, "Slain am I, O chief of men, by thee possessed of strength equal
to that of Sakra. Through ignorance, O foremost of men, I could not
before know thee. Now I know thee that art Rāma, the worthy Son of
Kauçalyā, my child; as well as the highly virtuous Vaidehi and the
renowned Lakshmana. By virtue of a curse, I entered this dreadful
Rākshasi form, I a Gandharba, having been cursed by Vaiçravana. Being
propitiated by me, that greatly famous one said,—’When Rāma the son of
Daçaratha, shall slay thee in encounter, thou, attaining thy natural
condition, shalt repair to the celestial regions.’ Getting wroth, he
cursed me, who had been absent; and thus did king Vaiçravana address me,
who had conceived love for Rambhā. Through thy grace have I been freed
from this fearful curse, I shall (now) repair to heaven. Hail, O
repressor of foes! Half a Yoyana hence, my child, dwells the righteous
and potent Maharshi, Sarabhanga, resembling the Sun. Seek him speedily:
he will bring about thy good. Casting me (into this pit) in the wood, do
thou, O Rāma, peacefully go thy way. Even this is the eternal usage of
the Rākshasas. hose that die in the forest, attain eternal regions."
Having said this unto Kākutstha, the mighty Virādha, afflicted with
arrows, having his body deposited (in the pit), attained heaven. Having
heard that speech of Virādha, Righava ordered Lakshmana, saying, "O
Lakshmana, do thou in this forest dig a capacious pit for this Rākshasa
resembling an elephant, dreadful, and of terrible acts." Having said
unto Lakshmana, "Dig a pit,"—Rāma possessed of prowess remained fixing
his foot on Virādha’ s throat. Then taking a hoe, Lakshmana dug a
spacious pit by the side of the huge-bodied⁷ Virādha. Then when his
throat had been freed, (Lakshmana) cast into the pit Virādha having ears
resembling javelins, sending loud and dreadful sounds. Having vanquished
him in fight, Rāma and Lakshmana possessed of activity and steady in
fight, being exceedingly delighted, raising up the dreadful Rākshasa by
main force, cast him howling (into the pit). Reflecting that he was
incapable of being slain (by sharpened weapons), those foremost of men,
exceedingly well versed (in arms), compassed the death of that mighty
Asura, Virādha, in the pit, after they had dug it. Virādha had himself
sincerely wished for his death at the hands of Rāma; and that ranger of
the woods had accordingly told (Rāma),—"My death cannot be effected by
means of weapons." Having heard these words, Rāma decided upon casting
him into a pit. And when the excessively strong Rākshasa entered the
cavity, he made the forest resound with his cries. Having thrown him
into the hole, Rāma and Lakshmana, their fears removed, appeared with
joyful looks, and rejoiced in that forest like the sun and the moon
seated in the heavens.⁸

    ⁶ Another reading is _Subhuyabhuyan—That one of elegant arms
      (raising) them up._—T.

    ⁷ The reading slightly varies in some texts.—T.

    ⁸ Another reading of this line is:—_And buried him under stones._
      The North-West Provinces text has four additional lines:—_Having,
      slain the Rākshasa and taken Mithtla’s daughter, those ones having
      bows decked in gold, being delighted, rejoiced in that mighty
      forest, like the sun and the moon seated in the sky._—T.




## SECTION V.


Having in the forest slain the Rākshasa Virādha possessed of tremendous
strength, Rāma endeued with prowess, embracing and cheering Sitā, spoke
unto his brother Lakshmana of flaming energy, saying, "This dense forest
is hard to live in; nor are we acquainted with the ways of the wood.
Therefore will we speedily repair to the ascetic Sarabhanga." Thereupon
Rāghava set out for the hermitage of Sarabhanga. And Rāma beheld a
mighty wonder near that one of celestial virtue, who had purified his
soul through asceticism. He saw the lord of the celestials, possessed of
a resplendent person, resembling in effulgence the sun or
Vaicwānara—mounted on a superb car—(saw) him that is followed by all the
celestials, stationed in the sky, not touching the earth, adorned in
luminous ornaments—the god dressed in a clean apparel; worshipped by
many a high-souled personage dressed in the same way. And from a
distance, (Rāma) saw the car stationed in the sky yoked with green
steeds—resembling the infant sun; and he saw the spotless umbrella
possessing the beauty of a mass of white clouds, resembling the lunar
disc,—and graced with variegated wreaths. And his (Indra’s) head was
being fanned by two chowris, costly and furnished with golden handles,
held by two magnificent damsels; and innumerable Gandharbas and Siddhas
and prime sages were hymning the celestial stationed in the welkin. And
seeing Sarabhanga engaged in converse with Satakratu, Rāma said unto
Lakshmana (the following words). And pointing out the car, Rāma showed
the wonder unto his brother. "Behold, O Lakshmana, yonder car stationed
in the sky, splendid, furnished with exceeding grace, wonderful, and
seeming as if the sun had fallen from the heavens. The steeds standing
in the sky are for certain those of which we had formerly heard as
belonging unto Sakra of many sacrifices. And, thou foremost of men,
these youths environing (the celestial) by hundreds, wearing earrings,
and bearing swords in their hands, are broad of chest, have arms
resembling bludgeons in size,and are clad in crimson vesture, like unto
tigers incapable of being approached. Over the breasts of all appear
chains of blazing sheen; and, O son of Sumitrā, their beauty appears
that of five and twenty. And even this is the ever-enduring age of the
celestials, as these foremost of men of sweet looks appear. O Lakshmana,
stay here awhile with Vaidehi, so long as I do not gather who it is that
is in the effulgent car." Saying unto Sumitras son, "Stay here,"
Kākutstha bent his steps towards Sarabhanga’s aslylum. And seeing Rāma
approach, Sachi’s lord, taking Sarabhanga’s permission, addressed the
celestials, saying, "Rāma is coming hither. Do ye set out for another
place, ere he yet addresses me. He is not fit to behold me (now.) When
he shall have vanquished (his foe in fight), and won success, shall I
readily show myself unto him. He shall have to achieve an act incapable
of being achieved by others." Then rendering homage unto that anchoret
and conversing with him, the weilder of the thunderbolt—subduer of
enemies—repaired to heaven in a car yoked with steeds. When the
thousand-eyed one had gone away, Rāghava accompanied by his companions
appeared before Sarabhanga in the _Agni-hotra_ chamber. Taking his feet,
Rāma, Sitā and Lakshmana sat down with the permission of the ascetic,
who received them and set apart quarters for them. Then Rāghava
questioned (the sage) concerning the visit of Sakra; and Sarabhanga
related everything unto Rāghava. "O Rāma, this bestower of boons wishes
to take me to the regions of Brahmā. I have conquered them, incapable of
being attained by persons that have not schooled themselves,—by virtue
of fierce austerities. O chief of men, knowing that thou wert near, I
became anxious to go to the minor celestial regions and this supreme
heaven (of Brahmā), after I had seen thee, righteous and high-souled,
who art my dear guest now. O foremost of men, I have for aye attained
the excellent regions of Brahmā. and Nākaprishtha. Do thou receive them
as pertaining to me." Thus addressed by the sage, Sarabhanga, that best
of men, Rāghava, versed in every branch of learning, said, "O mighty
anchoret, I shall acquire all those regions myself. I now wish that thou
mayst direct me as to my abode in this forest." Thus accosted by Rāghava
resembling Sakra in strength, the eminently wise Sarabhanga again said,
"O Rāma, here in this forest lives a pious and self-restrained ascetic
of mighty energy, named Sutikshna. He will bring about thy good. O Rāma,
follow this Mandākini flowing among flowers, which (here) runs in an
opposite direction to her usual course; and then wilt thou reach there.
This is thy course, thou best of men. Do thou now, my child, for a space
look at me; while I leave off my limbs, even as a serpent renounces its
slough." Then preparing a fire and with Mantras offering oblations into
it, the exceedingly energetic Sarabhanga entered into the fire. The fire
consumed the down, hair, old skin, bones, flesh and blood of that
high-souled one. (Anon) Sarabhanga became a youth resembling fire; and
rising from the flame, he appeared splendid. And proceeding past the
regions of high-souled sages sacrificing with fire, as well as of the
celestials, he ascended those of Brahmā. And that one of pious acts done
on earth—that best of the twice-born race—saw the grand-father, in
company with his followers. And the grand-father also, beholding that
Brāhmana, rejoiced greatly, and said,— "Hail!"



SECTI0N VI.


After Sarabhanga had ascended heaven, ascetics in bodies, assembled
together, presented themselves before Kākutstha; Rāma of flaming energy.
And Vaikhānasas, and VālakhilyaS, and Sanprakhālas, Marichipas,
Açmwakuttas in numbers, and those ascetics, Patrāhāras, and
Dantolukhalas, Unmajjakas next, and Gātracayyas, and Açayyās and
Anavakāçikas, those ascetics, Salilāhāras, Vāyubhaksbas after them,
Akāçanilayas, Sthandilaçāyis, Urddhavāsis of controlled senses, and
Ardrapattavāsas given to _Japa_, practising penances, and engaged in
performing the five kinds of austerities—all furnished with the grace
that comes of spiritual energy, and all firmly concentrated in
Yoga—these ascetics presented themselves before Rāma in the asyhim of
Sarabhanga. And coming before Rāma, the foremost of those practising
righteousness, those sages conversant with morality,—met in a body, said
unto that pre-eminently virtuous one, "A mighty car-warrior, thou art
the foremost person of the Ikshwāku race and the world; as well as their
lord,—even as Maghavan is the lord of the celestials. Famous over the
three worlds in high worth and prowess, in thee are found truth and
virtue in profusion and obedience unto the mandate of thy sire. O lord,
it behoves thee cognizant of virtue and attached unto it, to forgive us
for what we as suiters say unto thee. The sin, O lord, of that monarch
is mighty that taketh a sixth part of the subjects’ incomes, but doth
not protect them as sons. But he that, setting his heart on protecting
the people, doth ever carefully protect all the inhabitants of his
dominions, like his own life or like his son dearer unto him than life
itself, reapeth, O Rāma, enduring renown extending over many years, and
(at length) attaining the regions of Brahmā, is glorified there. The
king that protects his subjects righteously, is entitled to a fourth
part of the great religious merit that is reaped by an ascetic
subsisting on fruits and roots. O Rāma, this many Brāhmanas—this great
body of men that have assumed the Vānaprastha mode of life, although
having thee for their lord, are being sorely troubled by Rākshasas, as
if they had none. Come and behold the bodies of innumerable ascetics of
pure hearts that have in various ways been slaughtered by Rākshasas in
the forest. And great is the worry that is experienced by the dwellers
on the river Pampi and the Mandākini as well as those that reside in
Chitrakuta. We cannot bear the terrible affliction of the ascetics in
the forest at the hands of Rākshasas of dreadful deeds. Therefore, for
obtaining refuge, have we come before thee who art the refuge (of all).
Do thou, O Rāma, deliver us all, who are being exceedingly afflicted by
the rangers of the night. O hero, we have no greater refuge on earth
than thyself. Do thou, O king’s son, rescue us all from Rākshasas."
Hearing these words of the sages and ascetics, that righteous-souled one
addressed them, saying, "It doth not behove you to speak thus. I should
be commanded by the anchorets. I have entered the forest solely with a
view to my own purpose. I have entered this forest in obedience to the
mandate of my father, with the object (at the same time) of putting an
end to these ravages of the Rākshasas on you. I have at my own will come
hither for securing your interest. Then shall my stay in the woods be
crowned with mighty fruit. I wish to slay in battle the enemies of the
ascetics. Let the sages and ascetics behold my prowess as well as that
of my brother." Having been conferred a boon by the ascetics, that hero
entered upon a noble undertaking, and accompanied by the ascetics, in
company with Lakshmana directed his course to (the hermitage of)
Sutikshna.




## SECTION VII.


Rāma accompanied by his brother as well as Sitā went to the asylum of
Sutikshna in company with the twice-born ones. And having proceeded far,
and crossed many a stream of copious waters, Rāma saw a holy peak
towering high like the mighty Meru. Then those worthy scions of the
Ikshwāku race—descendants of Raghu—with Sitā entered the forest ever
furnished with various kinds of trees. And having entered the dense
forest abounding in blossoms and fruits and trees, Rāma saw in a recess
an asylum glittering with bark and garlands. There Rāma duly addressed
an ascetic seated in the lotus-attitude⁹ for warding off evil, even
Sutikshna, "O thou conversant with righteousness, speak to me, O
Maharshi, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess." Thereupon, eying Rāma
keenly, that calm (ascetic)—the foremost of those practising
righteousness, embracing him with his arms, said, "Welcome, thou
foremost of the Raghus, O Rāma, thou the best of those practising
righteousness. This asylum now hath been furnished with its master in
consequence of thy visit. O illustrious one, O hero, expecting thee, I
have not yet ascended heaven, renouncing on earth this body of mine. I
had (already) heard that, coming to Chitrakuta, (thou hadst been staying
there), having been deprived of the kingdom. Here came, O Kākutstha, the
Sovereign of the celestials of an hundred sacrifices. Coming to me, that
mighty deity, the Sovereign of the celestials, said that I had acquired
all the worlds by my pious acts. Do thou, by my grace, in company with
thy wife and Lakshmana, dwell delightfully in those regions won by my
asceticism, containing Devarshis." Thereupon the self-possessed Rāma
answered that blazing and truth-telling Brahmana of fiery austerities,
like Vasava answering Brahma, saying, "O mighty ascetic, I myself will
win those regions. I wish to be directed to a dwelling in this forest.
Thou art possessed of ability in respect of everything, and art (at the
same time) engaged in the welfare of all beings,—this hath been told
unto me by the high-souled Sarabhanga of the Gautama race." Thus
addressed by Rāma, that Maharshi known over all the worlds, spoke sweet
words ia great joy, "O meritorious Rāma, even this is the asylum (for
thee). Do thou live here pleasantly. It is inhabited by numbers of
saints and is always provided with fruits and roots. This forest is
haunted by herds of deer that range here without doing harm to any one,
although they possess great energy; and go away, having bewitched people
(by their beauty). Save what comes from these deer, there is no other
evil to be encountered here." Hearing those words of the Maharshi, the
placid elder brother of Lakshmana, taking up his bow with the arrow set,
said "O exalted one, if by means of sharpened shafts blazing like
lightning, I slay those herds of deer when they come, it shall impart
pain unto thee,—and what can be more unfortunate than this? Therefore I
shall not be able to dwell long in this asylum." Having said this, Rāma
ceased and became engaged in his evening adorations, and, having
finished them, along with Sitā and Lakshmana fixed his quarters in the
asylum of Sutikshna. Then, when the evening had passed away and night
fell, Sutikshna, having done homage unto those chiefs of men, offered
them excellent fare, suitable to ascetics.

    ⁹ The _yoga_ system has many positions for concentrating thought.—T.




## SECTION VIII.


Having been well entertained by Sutikshna, Rāma in company with
Sumitra’s son, having passed away the night there, awoke in the morning.
And arising in due time, Rāma along with Sitā, bathed in cool waters
odorous with the aroma of lotuses; and having in proper time duly
worshipped Fire as well as the deities, in that forest containing abodes
of ascetics, Rāma, Lakshmana and Videha’s daughter, their sins purged
off, seeing the sun risen, approached Sutikshna and spoke unto him these
mild words, saying—O Reverend sir, we have stayed here pleasantly, being
excellently ministered unto by thee. We greet thee, and go away. The
ascetics urge speed upon us. We hasten to view the collections of
asylums that belong unto the holy sages inhabiting the forest of
Dandaka. Now we crave thy permission along with that of these foremost
of anchorites, steady in virtue, crowned with asceticism and
self-controled, resembling smokeless flames. And we intend to set out
ere the sun, like unto a low-sprung one that hath attained to auspicious
fortune through evil ways, with rays incapable of being borne, shines
too fiercely." Having said this, Rāghava along with Sitā and Sumitra’s
son bowed down unto the ascetic’s feet. And as they touched his feet,
that best of ascetics, raising Rāma and Lakshmana up, embraced them
closely and said, "O Rāma, go thy way safely, in company with Sumitra’s
son and this Sitā that followeth thee like a shadow. Behold the
beauteous asylums, O hero, of these pure-spirited ascetics inhabiting
the forest of Dandaka. Thou wilt see blossoming woods garnishod with
fruits and roots, containing goodly deer, and mild feathered tribes;
tanks and pools laughing with blown lotuses, containing pleasant waters,
and abounding in Kārandavas; charming mountain-springs; and romantic
forests picturesque with peacocks. Go, O child; and go thou also, O
Sumitra’a son. And come again to my asylum after having seen these."
Thus addressed, Kākutstha along with Lakshmana, having gone round the
ascetic, prepared for departing. Then Sitā of expansive eyes handed to
the brothers excellent quivers, bows and shining swords. Then fastening
the graceful quivers, and taking the sweet-sounding bows, both Rāma and
Lakshmana issued from the hermitage. And permitted by the Maharshi, the
Rāghavas furnished with grace, equipped with bows and scimitars, swiftly
set out along with Sitā.




## SECTION IX.


When the son of Raghu had set out with Sutikshna’s permission, Sitā
addressed him in affectionate words and convincing speech,
saying,—"Although thou art great and followest the narrow way (of
righteousness), yet thou art on the eve of entering into
unrighteousness. But thou couldst by refraining from action, eschew this
unrighteousness that springs from an evil begot of desire. This evil
begot of desire is threefold. One prominent evil is falsehood, and both
the others are of weightier significance, —association with others’
wives, and vindictiveness without any (basis of) hostility. Falsehood, O
Rāghava, hath never been thine, nor can it ever be thine (in the
future). Nor yet, O foremost of men, canst thou ever even in fancy be
(guilty of) going after others’ wives, which marreth all religious
merit. These, O Rāma, are by no means in thee. O King’s son, thou ever
and a day directest thy attentions unto thy own wife. And thou art
righteous and truthful and doest the will of thy sire. In thee are
established virtue and truth—and every thing; and by help of thy
conquered senses, thou, O mighty-armed one, art capable of bearing
everything. And, O thou of a gracious presence, thine is control over
sense. The third evil that leads men through ignorance to bear hostility
towards others without any (cause of) hostility, is now present (unto
thee). Thou hast, O hero, for the protection of the saints dwelling in
the forest of Dandaka, promised the slaughter of Rākshasas in battle.
And it is for this reason that equipped with bows and arrows, thou hast
along with thy brother set out for the forest known as Dandaka. Seeing
thee set out, my mind reflecting on thy truthfulness as well as thy
happiness in this world and welfare in the next, is wrought up with
anxiety. And, O hero, I do not relish this journey to Dandaka. Thereof I
will tell thee the reason. Do thou listen to me as I tell thee. Bearing
bows and arrows in thy hands, thou hast come to the wood along with thy
brother; and (it may well happen) that seeing grim rangers of the
forest, thou mayst discharge thy shafts. And even as the vicinity of
faggots increases the energy of (ire, the proximity of (the bow)
enhances the strength and energy of the Kshatriya. Formerly, O
long-armed one, in a sacred wood haunted by beasts and birds, there
lived a truthful ascetic of a pure person. Intending to disturb his
austerities, Sachi’s lord, Indra, bearing a sword in his hand, came to
the asylum in the guise of a warrior. And in that asylum, that excellent
scimitar was deposited as a trust with that righteous person practising
asceticism. Receiving that weapon, that ascetic intent upon preserving
his trust, rangeth the forest, maintaining his faith. And intent upon
preserving his trust, he goeth nowhere for procuring fruits and roots
without that sword deposited with him as a trust. Constantly carrying
the sword, by degrees, the ascetic, foregoing all thoughts about
asceticism, had his mind involved in fierce sentiments. Thus in
consequence of bearing that weapon, that ascetic taken up with fierce
thoughts, losing his sobriety and led astray from righteousness, went to
hell. This ancient story anent the carrying of arms, asserts that even
as fire worketh change in a piece of wood, the presence of arms worketh
alteration in the mind of him bearing them. From affection and the high
honor in which I hold thee, I merely remind thee of this matter. I do
not teach thee. Equipped with bows as thou art, thou shouldst renounce
all thoughts of slaying without hostility the Rākshasas residing in
Dandaka. Without offence none should be slain.—It is the duty of
Kshatriya heroes by means of their bows to protect persons of subdued
souls, come by any calamity. Where are arms? And where is the forest?
Where is Kshatriya virtue? And where is asceticism? These arc opposed to
each other,—let us, therefore, honor the morality that pertains to this
place. From following arms, one’s sense gets befouled and deformed.
Again going to Ayodhyā, thou wilt observe the duties of Kshatriyas. Then
my mother-in-law and father-in-law shall experience enduring delight,
if, having renounced the kingdom, thou lead the life of an ascetic.
Interest springs from righteousness; and happiness also results
therefrom. One attains everything through righteousness—in this world
the only substantial thing. Repressing self by diverse restrictions,
intelligent people attain righteousness; but virtue crowned with
felicity, is incapable of being attained by following pleasure. O mild
one, ever cherishing thy heart in purity, do thou practise piety, in the
wood of asceticism. Everything—the three worlds—are truly known unto
thee. I have spoken this through feminine fickleness. Who can speak of
righteousness unto thee? Reflecting on and understanding things, do thou
along with thy younger brother speedily do what thou likest."




## SECTION X.


Hearing Vaidehi’s words spoken through high regard (for her husbands
Rāma with his energy enhanced, answered Janaka’s daughter, saying, “O
noble lady, thou hast spoken mild words fraught with worth and profit;
and, O Janaka’s daughter versed in virtue, thou hast expounded the
duties of Kshatriyas. What, O exalted one, shall I say? Thou hast
thyself by thy words (furnished an answer to what thou hadst said).
Kshatriyas wear bows in order that the word ’distressed’ may not exist
(on earth). O Sitā, those ascetics of severe vows that are beset with
perils in Dandaka, having personally come unto me, who am their refuge,
have sought protection at my hands. Always dwelling in the forest,
subsisting on fruits and roots, they on account of Rākshasas of cruel
deeds, do not, O timid one, attain ease. These ascetics are devoured by
terrible Rākshasas) living on human flesh. Being eaten up (by the
Rākshasas), the anchorites living in the forest of Dandaka—those best of
the twice-born ones— said unto us—’Be thou gracious unto us.’ Hearing
those words of theirs which fell from their lips, I, resolving to act in
accordance with their request, said,—’Be ye propitious.’ This is
surpassing shame unto me that such Vipras who themselves are worthy of
being sought, seek me. What shall I do? I said this in the presence of
those twice-born ones. Thereat all those that had come, said, ’We have
been, O Rāma, immensely harassed in the forest of Dandaka by Rākshasas
wearing shapes at will. Do thou deliver us. These irrepressible
Rākshasas living on human flesh vanquish us at the time of _Homa_, and
on the occasions of Parvas, O sinless one. Of the saints and ascetics
afflicted by the Rākshasas, who are on the search for their refuge, thou
art our best refuge. We can by virtue of the energy of our asceticism
easily destroy the rangers of the night; but we are loath to lose our
asceticism earned in a long time. O Rāghava, our austerities are
constantly disturbed, and we can hardly perform them. Therefore,
although sore afflicted and devoured by the Rākshasas dwelling in the
forest of Dandaka, we do not cast our curse on them. Thou along with thy
brother art our protector: thou art our master in this forest.’ Having
heard these words, I promised my perfect protection unto the saints in
the forest of Dandaka, O daughter of Janaka. Having promised, I living
cannot violate my vow concerning the ascetics; verily truth is ever dear
unto me. I had rather renounce my life, or thee, O Sitā, along with
Lakshmana,—but by no means my promise made, especially unto Brāhmanas. O
Videha’s daughter, the protection of the saints is incumbent on me even
without any representation,—and what (shall I say) when I have promised
the same? Thou hast spoken this unto me through affection and
friendship. I have been well pleased with thee, O Sitā. One doth not
instruct another that one doth not bear affection to. O beauteous
damsel, (what thou hast said) is worthy of both thy love and thy race. "
Having said these words unto Mithilā’s princess, the beloved Sitā, the
high-souled Rāma, equipped with bows, along with Lakshmana, directed his
steps towards the inviting woods of asceticism.




## SECTION XI.


Rāma went first; in the middle, Sitā; and bearing a bow in his hand,
Lakshmana went in their wake And they went with Sitā, seeing many
mountain-peaks, and forests, and delightful streams, and Chakravikas,
haunting river islets, and tanks with lotuses containing aquatic birds,
and herds of deer, and horned buffalos maddened with juices, and boars,
and elephants— foes to trees. Having proceeded a long way, when the sun
was aslant, they together saw a delightful tank measuring a _yojana_,
fifed with red and pale lotuses, graced with herds of elephants, and
abounding in aquatic cranes, swans and _Kadanivas_. And in that tank
containing charming and pleasant waters, they heard sounds of song and
instrumental music; but no one was seen there. Thereat, from curiosity,
Rāma and Lakshmana—mighty car-warrior—asked an ascetic named
Dharmabhrit, saying, "Hearing¹⁰ this mighty wonder, we have been worked
up with intense curiosity. Do thou tell us what this is." Thus accosted
by Rāghava, the ascetic then at once began to expatiate over the potency
of the pool. "This tank goes by the name of Panchāpsara, and is always
filled with water. It was made, O Rāma, by the ascetic Māndakarni, by
virtue of his asceticism. In yonder tank, the mighty ascetic, living on
air, performed signal austerities for ten thousand years. Thereat,
exceedingly agitated, all the deities with Agni at their head, assembled
together, said, ’This ascetic wishes to have the position of one of us.’
Thus all the deities present there were filled with anxiety. Then with
the view of disturbing his austerities, the deities ordered five
principal Apsarās, possessed of the splendour of live lightning. And for
compassing the end of the celestials, that ascetic conversant with the
morality and otherwise as well of this life as that to come, was brought
by those Apsarās under the sway of Madana. And those five Apsarās
(ultimately) became the wives of the ascetic; and their hidden residence
was reared in the pool. And there the five Apsarās living happily,
pleased the anchorite, established in youth through asceticism and
_yoga_. As thy sport, we hear the sounds of their musical instruments,
and the sweet voice of their song mixed with the tinklings of their
instruments." (Hearing this), the illustrious Rāghava along with his
brother declared the story narrated by that one of a pure heart to be
wonderful. Thus conversing, Rāma saw the collection of asylums, strewn
with Kuça and bark, and be-girt with energy derived from Brahma lore.
Entering (the place) along with Vaidehi and Lakshmana, the highly famous
Rāghava dwelt there respected by all the ascetics. Having happily dwelt
in those collections of graceful asylums, honored of the Maharshis,
Kākutstha by turns went to the hermitages of those ascetics with whom
that one well versed in arms had dwelt before. And Rāghava happily
passed his days somewhere for ten months, somewhere for one year,
somewhere for four months somewhere for five or six months, somewhere
for many months, somewhere for a month and a half, —somewhere for more,
somewhere for three months, and somewhere for eight. And as Rāma lived
in the asylums of the ascetics and amused himself through their good
graces, ten years were passed away (in this way). Having gone round the
asylums of all the ascetics, Rāghava cognizant of righteousness returned
to the hermitage of Sutikshna. Coming to this asylum, respected by the
ascetics, that subduer of enemies, Rāma, stayed there for a time. Once
upon a time, as Kākutstha dwelling in that asylum was seated, he humbly
observed unto that great ascetic, "I have always heard from men speaking
on the subject that that foremost of ascetics, the reverend Agastya,
lives in this forest. On account of the vastness of this forest, I do
not know that place. Where is the hermitage of that intelligent
Maharshi? For propitiating that revered one, I, accompanied by my
brother and Sitā, will go to Agastya for paying our respects unto the
ascetic. This great desire is burning in my heart, that I should myself
minister unto that best of anchorets." Hearing these words of the
righteous-souled Rāma, Sutikhna, well pleased, answered Daçaratha’s son,
saying, "I also am desirous of telling thee this along with Lakshmana.
Repair unto Agastya in company with Sitā, O RSghava. By luck thou hast
thyself said this unto me as to thy purpose. I will, O Rāma, tell thee
where that mighty ascetic, Agastya, is. My child, go four miles from the
hermitage in a southerly direction; and thou wilt come to the hermitage
of the brother of the auspicious Agastya situated on a land covered with
trees, graced with _Pippali_ woods, abounding in fruits and flowers,
charming, and resonant with the notes of various birds. There are many
tanks containing delightful waters, swarming with swans and Karandavas,
and beauteous with Chakravakas. Passing a night there, do thou, O Rāma,
in the morning, taking a southerly course, go by the skirts of the
forest tract. Passing a _yojana_, thou shalt come upon Agastya’s asylum,
located at a charming woodland graced with many a tree. There Videha’s
daughter and Lakshmana shall experience delight in thy company. O
magnanimous one, if thou intend to see the mighty ascetic, Agastya, in
that charming woodland, containing a great many trees, then do thou make
up thy mind to set out this very day.” Hearing these words of the
anchoret, Rāma, saluting him, along with his brother, set off for
Agastya’s (place) with his younger brother and Sitā. And, pleasantly
proceeding by the way directed by Sutikshna, seeing pirturesque woods,
hills resembling clouds, watery expanses and streams flowing by their
path; Rāma filled with delight said these words unto Lakshmana, “Surely
we see the asylum of that high-souled one, the ascetic, Agastya’s
brother of pious acts. These trees standing by thousands on the way
bending beneath the weight of fruits and flowers, hear the signs that
had been mentioned to me as belonging to this wood. And from the wood is
wafted by the wind the pungent odour of ripe _pippalis_. And here and
there are found heaps of fire-wood, and torn _Darva_ are seen, of the
lustre of lapises. And the top of the column of smoke belonging unto the
fire lit in the asylum in this wood, appears like the peak of a dark
mountain. And twice-born ones, having performed their ablutions in
sacred and retired bathing places, are offering flowers gathered by
themselves, O placid one, from what I had heard from Sutikshna, this
would appear to be the asylum of Agastya’s brother. The righteous
Agastya it is who, wishing for the welfare of the worlds, destroying by
virtue of his austerities a Daitya resembling Death, hath rendered this
quarter habitable. Once on a time here dwelt together two mighty Asuras,
brothers given to slaughtering Brāhmanas—the wily Vātāpi and Ilwala.
Wearing the form of a Brāhmana, and speaking Sanskrit, the cruel one
used to invite Vipras to a _Srāddha_. And, cooking his brother wearing
the shape of a sheep, he used to feed the twice-born ones according to
the rites prescribed for _Srāddhas_. Then when the Vipras had fed,
Ilwala said,— "O Vātāpi, come out, uttering a loud sound." Hearing his
brother’s words, Vātāpi, bleating like a sheep, came out, riving their
bodies. In this way, thousands of Brāhmanas gathered together, were
destroyed by flesh-eating ones wearing shapes at will. (And it came to
pass that once upon a time) the Maharshi Agastya, having been invited to
a Srāddha, fed on the mighty Asura. Thereupon uttering—’Finished’ and
offering water to wash hands with, Ilwala said unto his brother, ’Come
out’! And, as that brother of Vātāpi, given to slaughtering Vipras was
speaking thus, that foremost of ascetics, the intelligent Agastya, said
with a laugh, ’Where is the power of coming out, of the Rākshasa, thy
brother wearing the shape of a sheep, who hath gone to Yama’s abode?’
Hearing his words, from wrath the ranger of the night prepared to assail
the ascetic, and he rushed against that foremost of the twice-born ones.
And, being consumed by that ascetic of flaming energy with his eyes
resembling fire, the Rākshasa met his end. This asylum graced with pools
and groves belongs to the brother of him who hath performed this arduous
feat from compassion for the Vipras’. As Rāma was thus conversing with
Sumitrā’s son, the sun set and evening approached. Then, duly performing
his afternoon adorations along with his brother, Rāma entered the
hermitage, and saluted the ascetic. Well received by the ascetic,
Rāghava spent there a night, eating fruits and roots. When the night had
passed away, and the solar disc arose, Rāghava greeted Agastya’s
brother, saying, "O reverend Sir, I salute thee. I have pleasantly
passed the night. I greet thee; I shall go to behold my preceptor, thy
elder brother." Thereat, on the ascetic’s saying, ’Go thou,’ the
descendant of Raghu went away by the prescribed route. And Rāma viewed
the forest, and Nihāras, and Panaças, and Sālas, Vanjulas and Tinisas,
and Chirivilwas, and Madhukas, and Vilvas, and Tindukas,—all in full
flower, and graced with blossoming creepers, and trees in the wood by
hundreds, roughly handled by elephants with their trunks, and graced by
monkeys, and resounding with the voices of an hundred maddened warblers.
Then the lotus-eyed Rāma said unto that enhancer of auspiciousness, the
heroic Lakshmana, who was by him, and was following him at his back,
"The leaves of these trees are glossy, and the beasts and birds are
mild, even as (we had been told). The asylum of the pure-hearted
Maharshi must not be far. This asylum capable of removing the fatigue of
the weary, belonging to him that is known among men as Agastya by his
own acts, is seen, with the (neighbouring woods) filled with smoke, and
itself decorated with bark and wreaths, containing herds of mild deer,
and ringing with the notes of various birds. This is the asylum of that
pious one, who destroying (the Asura resembling) Death, hath, desirous
of the welfare of mankind, rendered the Southern quarter habitable, and
through whose potency the Rākshasas from fear barely cast their eyes in
this direction, but do not approach. Ever since that one of pious ways
possessed himself of this quarter, the rangers of the night have
foregone their hostility, and assumed a peaceful attitude. This Southern
quarter rendered safe (by Agastya),and incapable of being harassed by
those ones of tortuous ways, is celebrated over the three worlds in
conection with the name of the reverend ascetic. And this graceful
asylum ranged by mild beasts belongs to that long-lived one of renowned
achievements— Agastya—in obedience to whose command, the Vindhya
mountain—foremost of its kind—which had always obstructed ihe way of the
Sun, doth not increase. This pious one honored of men, ever engaged in
the welfare of the righteous, shall do good unto us, who have come to
him. I shall adore the mighty ascetic, Agastya, and, O mild one, O
master, here pass away the remainder of the term of my banishment. Here
celestials with the Gandharbas, and Siddhas and eminent saints,
observing restrictions in respect of food, adore Agastya. And the
ascetic is such that a liar cannot live here, nor a cunning or a crafty
person, nor a wicked wight, nor one that is given to unrighteousness.
And adoring righteousness, celestials, and Yakshas, and Nāgas, and
birds, live here restricting their fare. And high-souled Siddhas and
eminent saints, renouncing their bodies, repair to celestial regions in
cars resembling the sun. And adored by auspicious individuals, the
deities here confer on them the states of Yakshas and celestials, and
divers kingdoms. O Sumitra’s son, entering the asylum before us, do thou
announce unto the saints that I along with Sitā, have arrived here."

   ¹⁰ Some texts:—Seeing.




## SECTION XII.


Having entered the asylum, Rāghava’s younger brother, Lakshmana, coming
to a disciple of Agastya, spoke unto him, saying, "There was a king,
named Daçaratha. His eldest son, the strong Rāma, hath come (to this
asylum) along with his wife, Sitā, for seeing the ascetic.—Named
Lakshmana, I am his younger brother, obedient and devoted to him.—Thou
mayst have heard of it. Having entered this horrid forest, in consonance
with the mandate of our sire, we desire to see the reverend one. Tell
this unto him." Hearing Lakshmana’s words, that ascetic, saying. "So be
it!", entered the chamber of the sacrificial fire, for the purpose of
communicating (the news unto Agastya). Entering in, Agastya’s beloved
disciple, with joined hands communicated unto that foremost of ascetics,
incapable of being repressed,¹¹ exactly what Lakshmana had told
him,—"For seeing the reverend one, and serving him as well, those
subduers of their foes, Daçaratha’s sons, Rāma and Lakshmana,
accompanied by Sitā, have entered this asylum. It now behoves thee to
command what is to be done next." Hearing from his disciple that Rāma
had come along with Lakshmana and the highly virtuous Vaidehi, Agastya
said, "By luck it is that after a long time, Rāma hath come to see me. I
had mentally wished for his arrival. Go thou; and let Rāma, having been
respectfully received, come before me. Why hast thou not brought him
thyself?" Thus addressed by the high-souled and righteous ascetic, the
disciple saluting him, with joined hands, said, "So be it." Then issuing
out, the disciple said unto Lakshmana, "Where is Rāma? Let him come and
enter in." Thereat, going to the asylum in company with the disciple (of
Agastya), Lakshmana showed unto him Kākutstha and the daughter of
Janaka, Sitā. Then joyfully communicating unto Rāma the words of the
reverend one, the disciple (of Agastya) duly took in that one worthy of
being honored. And seeing the asylum teeming with mild deer, Rāma
entered in with Lakshmana and Sitā. And there Rāma beheld the place of
Brahma, and that of Agni,—that of Vishnu, and that of the great Indra,
the place of Vivaswat, and that of Soma, and that of Bhaga, and that of
Dhātā and Vidhātā, and that of Vāyu, and that of the high-souled Vāruna
having the noose in his hand, and that of Gāyatri, and that of the
Vasus, and that of the monarch of the _Nāgas_, and that of Garuda, and
that of Kartikeya, and that of Dharma. And it came to pass that,
surrounded by his disciples, the ascetic came (before Rāma). And Rāma
saw that one of flaming energy at the head of the ascetics; and the hero
said unto Lakshmana, enhancer of auspiciousness, "O Lakshmana, the
revered saint, Agastya, is coming out. I recognize that mass of
asceticism by a certain kind of majesty (that characterizes him)."
Having said this touching Agastya of the splendour of the sun, that son
of Raghu took hold of his feet. Then, having paid him homage, Rāma with
joined hands stood there in company with Videha’s daughter, Sitā, and
Lakshmana. Thereat, embracing Rāma and honoring him with water and a
seat, and asking him questions anent his welfare, the saint said,
"Welcome!" Offering oblations unto the fire, and presenting Arghya unto
the guests, and paying them homage, that ascetic entertained them with
food in accordance with the Vanasprastha mode of life; and then first
sitting down, that foremost of ascetics, the pious Agastya, addressed
Rāma cognizant of righteousness, staying with joined hands, "O
Kākutstha, if an ascetic acts otherwise (in respect of a guest,) he in
the next world feeds on his own flesh, like a false witness. The
sovereign of all the worlds, righteous, a mighty car warrior, worthy of
being honored and worshipped, thou hast become our beloved guest."
Having said this, Agastya, according to his desire, worshipping Rāghava
with fruits, roots and flowers, said unto him, "O foremost of men, this
mighty, celestial bow belonging unto Vishnu, and constructed by
Vicwakarmā, and this best of arrows (named) Brahmadatta, infallible and
resembling the sun, and this inexhaustible couple of quivers filled with
sharpened shafts, like unto flaming fire; were granted unto me by the
mighty Indra. And here is this mighty golden scabbard, and this sword
decked in gold. Having, O Rāma, slain the mighty Asuras with this bow,
Vishnu in days of yore in battle secured the effulgent Fortune of the
celestials. O bestower of honor, do thou for securing victory, take this
bow, these quivers, this arrow, and this scimitar, like the holder of
the thunderbolt, taking the same." Having said this that highly
energetic one, the reverend Agastya, consigning unto Rāma all those
weapons, again said.

   ¹¹ Some texts:—_Effulgent_.




## SECTION XIII.


Rāma, I am pleased with thee; good betide thee! And, O Lakshmana, I am
gratified by thee. Ye are in trouble in consequence of the great fatigue
that ye have undergone on the way. And Janaka’s daughter, the noble
Maithili, is evidently eager (for rest). Of tender years and unknown to
hardship, she hath come to the forest rife with troubles, being urged by
the love she bears unto her lord. Do thou, O Rāma, conduct thyself so,
that Sitā may find a pleasant time of it. By following thee to the
forest, it is a hard task that she is performing. O son of Raghu, this
hath been the nature of the fair sex from the commencement of creation,
that they gladden him that is well off, and forsake a person in
adversity. And women imitate the instability of lightning, the sharpness
of weapons,and the celerity of Garuda and the wind¹². But this wife of
thine is absolutely free from all these defects; she is worthy of being
extolled and the foremost of those devoted to their lord, like Arundhati
among the gods. This region, O Rāma, will be adorned, since, O subduer
of enemies, thou along with Vaidehi and Sumitra’s son, wilt dwell here."
Thus addressed by the ascetic, Rāghava, joining his hands, humbly
observed unto that saint resembling flaming fire, "Blessed and beholden
am I, since the foremost of ascetics is gratified with my merits as well
as with those of my brother and wife. Do thou now direct me to a country
well watered, and abounding in woods, where rearing an asylum, I may
dwell delightfully and pleasantly." Hearing Rāma’s words, that best of
ascetics, reflecting for a while, spoke these excellent words, "Two
Yojanas hence, my child, is a region abounding in fruits and roots,
containing countless deer, and beautiful—known by the name of
Panchavati. Repairing thither, do thou, rearing an asylum, pass thy time
pleasantly in company with Sumitra’s son, duly doing the mandate of thy
sire. O sinless one, all this news relating to thyself, has from
affection been known to me through the potency of my asceticism, as also
that relating to Daçaratha. Although thou hast promised to dwell with me
in this ascetic grove, yet by virtue of my asceticism I know the desire
that is in thy heart. I therefore tell thee, repair to Panchavati. That
is a charming woodland, and there Mithilā’s daughter shall dwell with
delight. And that tract is worthy of all praise, and, O Rāghava, it is
not distant from here.—It is in the vicinity of the Godāvari. Mithilā’s
daughter shall live there agreeably. And that spot abounds in fruits and
roots, is frequented by various fowls, is retired, O mighty-armed one,
and is sacred and beautiful. And thou of pure ways, and competent to
protect the ascetics, shall, O Rāma, protect them. O hero, yonder is the
mighty wood of Madhukas. Directing thy course to the asylum of Nagrodha
trees, go by the north of this Madhuka wood. Then arriving at a spot
hard by a hill, (thou wilt) come upon the celebrated Panchavati, crowned
with blossoming woods." Thus accosted by Agastya, Rāma along with
Sumitra’s son, honouring the truth-speaking saint, greeted him. Then,
having saluted his feet, they, taking the saint’s permission, set out
along with Sitā for the hermitage of Panchavati. And, taking their bows
and quivers those sons of the king, of undiminished martial virtue, with
intent minds bent their course to Panchavati by the way laid down by the
Maharshi.

   ¹² The commentator explains:—_They imitate the lightning in changing
      their residence, the sharpness of weapons in severing affection,
      and the celerity of Garuda or the wind in doing wrong.—T_.




## SECTION XIV.


As he was proceeding to Panchavati, Raghu’s son saw a huge-bodied
vulture of terrible prowess. And seeing him in the forest, the exalted
Rāma and Lakshmana, as they were conversing With each other, knowing the
bird to be (in reality) a Rākshasa, asked him, saying, "Who art thou?"
Thereupon, in soft and sweet words, he, pleasing them, said, "My child,
know me for a friend of thy father." Knowing him to be a friend of his
sire, Rāghava paid him homage, and enquired for his name and lineage.
Hearing Rāma’s words, he mentioned his own lineage, and related the
origin of all beings. "O mighty-armed one, I shall describe (unto thee)
from the very beginning the (history of) those that were Prajāpatis in
days of yore. Listen, O Rāghava. Of these, the first is Kardamā, then
Vikrita, and then Sesha, Sancraya, the powerful Vahuputra, Sthānu,
Marichi, Atri, the mighty Kratu, Pulastya, Angira, Pracheta, Pulaha,
Daksha, Vivaswat, Arishtanemi, O Rāghava, and the exceedingly energetic
Kaçyapa. These had the west. The Prajāpati Daksha, it hath been heard by
us, O Rāma, had sixty famous and illustrious daughters. Of these Kaçyapa
wed eight, with elegant waists;—Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kālikā,¹³ Tamrā,
Krodhavasā, Manu and Analā. Then, well pleased, Kaçyapa again said unto
those damsels, "Do thou bring forth sons like unto myself, who shall be
lords of the three worlds." Thereat, Aditi, O Rāma, Diti, Danu, and
Kālikā, O mighty-armed one, consented,—the rest were of another mind.
And of Aditi were born thirty-three deities, O repressor of thy foes,
_viz_., the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Açwinas, O subduer
of enemies. And, my child, Diti gave birth to those sons, the renowned
Daityas. Formerly, this earth girt with seas was in the possession of
these. And, O vanquisher of thy foes, Danu gave birth to a son, named,
Açwagriva. And Kalika brought forth Naraka and Kālaka. And Tamra gave
birth to these five daughters celebrated in the world,— Kraunchi, Bhāsi,
Syeni, Dhritarshtri, and Suki. And Kraunchi gave birth to the Ulukas,
and Bhāsi, to Bhāsas, and Syeni to hawks and vultures possessed of
energy; and Dhritarashtri to swans, all kinds of Kalahansas, and
Chakravākas, and that damsel, Suki, to Natā. And Vinatā was Natā’s
daughter. And Krodhavasā, O Rāma, brought forth ten daughters, _viz._,
Mrigi, Mrigamandā, Hari, Bhadramadā, Mātangi, Sārduli, Swetā, Surabhi
crowned with every (auspicious mark), Surasā and Kadrukā. And, thou
foremost of the best of men, Mrigi’s sons were all the deer, and those
of Mrigamandā. were bears, Srimāras and Chamaras. And Bhadramadā bore
one daughter, Irāvati. And Irāvati’s son is the mighty elephant, who is
the lord of the worlds. And Hari’s sons are lions and the nimble
monkeys. And Sārduli brought forth as her sons, Golāngulas, and tigers;
and the offspring of Mātangi were mad elephants, O best of men. And
Swetā, O Kākutstha, gave birth to the elephants of the cardinal points.
And, O Rāma, Surabhi gave birth unto two daughters—the famous Rohini,
and Gandharbi. Rohini produced kine, and the sons of Gandharbi are
horses. And Surasā, O Rāma, gave birth to Nāgas, and Kadru, to Pannagas.
And Kāçyapa’s other wife Manu begot mankind—Brāhmanas, Kshatriyas,
Vaiçyas, and Sudras. From the mouth, it is known, sprang Brāhmanas, from
the breast, Kshatriyas, from the thighs, Vaiçyas, and from the feet,
Sudras. And Analā produced all trees bearing sacred fruits. Vinatā (was)
Suki’s grand-daughter, and Kadru, Surasā’s aunt. And Kadru gave birth to
a thousand Nāgas with the holder of the Earth. And Vinatā brought forth
two sons,—Garuda, and Aruna. And from Aruna sprang myself and my elder
brother Sampāti. O subduer of enemies, know me for Jatāyu, the son of
Syeni. If thou will, I shall become thy help during thy abode (in the
woods). And, O child, I shall protect Sitā when thou shalt go out along
with Lakshmana." There Rāghava paying homage unto Jatāyu, and embracing
him joyfully, bent low; and that self-possessed one listened to the
story of Jatāyu’s friendship with his father, as related by him
repeatedly. Then consigning unto that bird of exceeding strength,
Mithilā’s daughter, Sitā, Rāma accompanied by Lakshmana went to
Panchavati, destroying his foes and protecting the worlds.

   ¹³ Some texts:—_Kalaka.—T._




## SECTION XV.


Then repairing to Panchavati filled with various animals and beasts of
prey, Rāma remarked unto his brother of flaming energy, "(Now) we have
come to the place to which we had been directed by the ascetic. This, O
amiable one, is Panchavati furnished with blossoming woods. Do thou cast
thy eyes around this forest, and (ascertain) what spot shall suit our
asylum. Do thou find out such a place in the vicinity of a tank where
thyself Sitā and I may dwell happily, which is graced with the garniture
of woods and delightful with liquid lapses, and whose neighbourhood
yields fuel, flowers, Kuça and water." Thus addressed by Rāma, Lakshmana
with joined hands, said unto Kākutstha in the presence of Sitā, "O
Kākutstha, even if I were to stay with thee for an hundred years, I
shall remain thy servant. Thyself selecting some beauteous spot, do thou
tell me—’Construct (an asylum).’" Well pleased with the words of
Lakshmana, that highly effulgent one, after due reflection, selected a
site having every recommendation. Going to that romantic spot for
rearing an asylum, Rāma, taking the hand of Sumitra’s son in his, said
unto him, "This place is level, graceful, and surrounded with blossoming
trees. Do thou duly construct an asylum at this spot. Hard by is seen a
beautiful pool, embellished with lotuses, resembling the sun, and
breathing balmy perfume. And, as told by that pure-hearted ascetic,
Agastya, this is the graceful Godavari, bordered by flowering
trees;—swarming with swans and Kārandavas, delighted with Chakravākas;
thronged with herds of deer¹⁴, not far, yet not so very near. And
resounding with the cries of peacocks; charming; elevated; containing
full many a cave; do thou, O amiable one, behold these hills, covered
with trees in full flower; and they are shining like elephants painted
with diverse colors by persons with the utmost care; adorned with Sālas,
palmyras, Tamālas, dates, Panasas, Nivāras, Tinisas, and Punnāgas. And
covered with mangos, and Tilakas, and Ketakas, and Champakas, and trees
entwined by flowers and herbs and plants; and containing Syandanas,
sandals, Nipas, Panasas, Lakuchas, Dhavas, Açwakarnas, Khadiras, Samis,
Kinçukas and Pātalas. This spot is sacred —this spot is charming—this
spot abounds in beasts and birds. Here will I dwell, O Sumitra’s son, in
company with this bird¹⁵." Thus addressed by Rāma, the exceedingly
powerful Lakshmana, slayer of hostile heroes, in a short time raised an
asylum for his brother. And the exceedingly stout Lakshmana created
there for Rāghava a spacious hut thatched with leaves made of clay,
furnished with pillars, constructed with long bamboos, graceful,—spread
with Sami boughs; tightly fastened with strong cords; covered with Kuçā,
reeds, and leaves; with its floor well leveled; and charming; beautiful
to look at, and exceedingly excellent. And then going to the river
Godavari, the lovely Lakshmana, performing his bath, and securing
lotuses and fruits, came back (to the asylum). Then offering flowers,
and duly performing rites for the peace (of the habitation), Lakshmana
showed the asylum which he had made unto Rāma. Seeing the beautiful
asylum along with Sitā, Rāghava experienced high raptures. And joyfully
embracing Lakshmana with his arms, Rāma said these exceedingly calm and
solemn words, "Pleased am I with thee. Thou hast done a great deed, my
brother; for which I have granted thee my embrace by way of reward.
While thou, his son, skilled in reading thought, grateful, and cognizant
of righteousness art alive, O Lakshmana, my father is not dead." Having
said this unto Lakshmana, Rāghava-the enhancer of
auspiciousness—experiencing felicity , began to dwell happily in that
region filled with fruits. And ministered unto by Sitā and Lakshmana,
that righteous one lived there, like the immortals in heaven.

   ¹⁴ _Come to slake their thirst._—Rāmāyana.—T.

   ¹⁵ Jatāyu.—T.




## SECTION XVI.


As the high-souled Rāghava was dwelling there peacefully, after autumn
had departed, the welcome winter commenced. And it came to pass that
once on a time, when the night had passed away and day broke, that son
of Raghu went to the romantic river Godāvari for performing his bath.
And as the humble son of Sumitrā Rāma’s puissant brother bearing a water
pitcher in his hand was following Rāma along with Sitā at his back, the
former said unto Rāma, "O sweet-speeched one, now is come that season
which thou hast ever held dear; and as if decorated by which comes on
the entire auspicious year. Now people have their persons rendered rough
from dew; the earth is replenished with corn; water is difficult of
being used; and fire becomes enjoyable. And men having worshipped the
gods and the Pitris by celebrating Agrayana on the occasion of partaking
new rice, have at this season, their sins purged off. The provinces
overflow with food, and abound in milk and articles prepared there-
from; and kings bent on conquest, range about for surveying them. And on
the sun having veered steadily to the quarter presided over by the
Destroyer¹⁶, the north appears like a female without her _tilaka_¹⁷.
Naturally abounding in snow, and now having the sun at a great distance,
the mountain Himavān¹⁸ justly beareth that name. At miday the days are
delightful to a degree to range in, feel highly agreeable, and have
pleasant suns; while shade and water are uncomfortable. And the days now
have mild suns, are covered with dew, severely cold, with the forests
remaining idle¹⁹, and the lotuses destroyed by frost. And now at night
people cannot lie down in unsheltered places; and the nights are
inferred from the presence of Pushyā. And at night the atmosphere (being
covered with vapour) looks brown; and it is bitter cold then; and the
hours are long. And the good fortune of the Moon hath fallen to the Sun;
and the disc of the former is reddish with vapour; and like unto a glass
breathed upon, it doth not shine clearly. And the moonlight furnished by
vapour doth not appear pleasant; and like Sitā pallid because of
(exposure to) sunshine, is perceptible, but doth not look beauteous. And
at this season the western wind naturally of gelid feel, being permeated
at present with cold, blows with double coldness. And the forests
enveloped in mist, and stocked with wheat and barley, look brilliant at
sunrise, with Kraunchas and cranes crying (in chorus). Golden-hued paddy
slightly inclined, appear graceful, with their heads like unto
date-flowers filled with rice. And the sun although high advanced, yet
having its rays covered with thick mist, appeareth like the moon. And
feeble at the first part of the day, and of agreeable touch at mid-day,
the sunshine, being surcharged with mist, appeareth palish over the face
of the earth. And in the woods, swards covered with green grass, and
with dew-drops on it, look handsome on the morning sun brightening it
up. And wild elephants waxing exceedingly thirsty, draw away their
trunks, just as they touch beautifully clear and cold water. And those
aquatic fowls seated by, do not dip themselves in the water, like unto
cravens shunning fight. And the rows of trees, shorn of their blossoms,
on being enveloped with dew at night and mist at morn, look as if they
were fast asleep. And the streams appear with their waters enveloped in
vapour,and the cranes, perceived through their cries, and their banks
having their sands wet. And what on account of the snow-fall, what of
the mildness of the sun, and what through the cold, water even when it
is on a mountain top, tastes sweet. And lotuses afflicted by the cold,
with the stalks only left, and with their petals dropping down and their
pericarps and filaments shrivelled up, do not appear beautiful. And, O
foremost of men, at this season, influenced by regard for thee, Bharata
undergoing affliction of spirit, is performing mortifications in the
city. And forsaking kingdom, and dignity, and the many and various
enjoyments, Bharata practising asceticism and restraining himself in
respect of food, in this winter lieth down on the bare earth. And he
also, for certain, at this hour of the day, surrounded by his subjects,
daily wendeth to the river Sarayu for performing his ablutions. Brought
up in luxury, and exceedingly tender, how can he, afflicted with cold,
perform his ablutions during the latter part of the night? Of eyes
resembling lotus petals, grey-hued, endued with grace, with a navel
depressed, and mighty, Bharata understandeth righteousness, is
truth-speaking, of restrained senses (in respect of others’ wives) and
also of subdued senses. And he speaketh fair, and is sweet-tempered, and
long-armed and the vanquisher of foes. And renouncing various pleasures,
he hath devoted himself unto the noble one. Thy high-souled brother hath
secured heaven, since he, resorting to asceticism, is imitating thee
that resident in the woods. The saying that people follow their mother
and not their father, is falsified in the case of Bharata. How can
mother Kaikeyi, whose husband is Daçaratha and son the righteous
Bharata, have such crooked way?" As the virtuous Lakshmana was speaking
thus from affection, Rāghava, not bearing the blame cast upon his mother
(Kaikeyi), said, "My brother, thou shouldst by no means, tax our second
mother. Do thou talk of that lord of the Ikshwāku race, Bharata. Albeit
my mind is firm as regards my sojourn in the woods, yet is my mind
unsteady, being inflamed with affection for Bharata. I remember his dear
sweet words, taking the heart, resembling ambrosia, filling the soul
with delight. When shall I, O son of Raghu, meet with the high-souled
Bharata, and the heroic Satrughna, and thyself?²⁰" Having bewailed thus,
Kākutstha, coming to the river Godavari, there performed his ablutions
in company with younger brother and Sitā. Then having offered his
adorations with water unto the gods and the Pitris, those sinless hymned
the risen sun as well as the celestials. Having with Sitā as the second
and Lakshmana, performed his bath. Rāma looked beautiful like that lord
the reverend Rudra in company with Nandi and the daughter of the king of
mountains.

   ¹⁶ _i. e._—The South.—T.

   ¹⁷ A mark made with colored earths or unguents upon the forehead and
      between the eye-brows either by way of ornament or a sectarial
      distinction.—T.

   ¹⁸ _Himavan_ means _having snow._—T.

   ¹⁹ ’Of antres vast and deserts idle.’ _Othello_. Although not in
      common use, the word is very picturesque, and hence the
      adoption.—T.

   ²⁰ Thyself, the meaning is evident when shall we all meet
      together.—T.




## SECTION XVII.


Having bathed, Rfima, Sit! and Sumitri’s son went to their own asylum
from the banks of the Godāvari. Arriving at the asylum, Rāghava along
with Lakshmana, performing his morning devotions, entered the cottage.
And honored of the Maharshis Rāma happily dwelt in that cottage; and
seated with Sitā that mighty-armed one looked like the Moon in
conjunction with Chitra. And he carried on various converse with his
brother Lakshmana. As Rāma was thus seated with his mind engrossed in
that talk, A Rākshasi came to that region at her will. And that one
named Surpanakhā, sister unto the ten-necked Rākshasa, coming upon Rāma,
saw him like a celestial, having a leonine chest, mighty-arms, and
expansive eyes resembling lotus leaves, with the powerful gait of the
elephant, wearing a head of matted locks, with a resplendent
countenance, bearing regal marks. And beholding Rāma dark-blue like the
lotus, and becoming like Kandarpa himself, and resembling Indra, the
Rākshasi was maddened with desire. Rāma was graced with a beauteous
countenance, that Rākshas had a hideous face; Rāma had a slender waist,
she had a huge abdomen; he had expansive eyes, she had terrible eyes; he
was gifted with an elegant head of hair, she had coppery hair; Rāma was
of a dear presence, she was of an unsightly presence; Rāma had a
sonorous voice, she had a hedeous voice; Rāma was youthful, the Rākshasi
was an old hag; Rāma had mellifluous accents, she had harsh accents;
Rāma was ever abiding by justice, she was unruly; Rāma was handsome, she
was ugly. That Rākshasi being wrought up with passion addressed Rāma
saying "Wearing matted locks, and equipped with bows and arrows, why
hast thou along with thy wife come to this region haunted by Rākshasas?
It behoveth thee to say what the object of thy visit is." Thus accosted
by the Rākshasi, Surpanakha, that subduer of his foes from sincerity of
disposition began to relate everything:—"There was a king named
Daçaratha endeued with the prowess of a celestial. I am his eldest son
known among men by the name of Rāma. This is my younger brother (named)
Lakshmana, (ever) serving me. This is my wife, known by the name of
Sitā. Commanded by my father and mother, I in obedience to their
mandate, desirous of acquiring religious merits, have for the purpose of
securing righteousness, come to this forest for dwelling here. I also am
anxious to know thee. Whose daughter art thou? And what is thy name, and
what is thy lineage? Possessed of a captivating form, thou appearest to
me as a Rākshasi. Tell me truly why thou hast come here." Hearing these
words the Rākshasi, afflicted with lust, said, "Listen, O Rāma. I will
relate everything truly, I am a Rākshasi, capable of wearing shapes at
will. My name is Surpanakha. Striking terror into the hearts of all, I
range this forest alone. My brother is named Rāvana.²¹ Thou mayst have
heard of him. And he that is given to long sleep —the mighty
Kumbhakarna, the righteous Bibhishana, who never serves the Rākshasas,
and the brothers Khara and Dushana renowned in conflict (are also my
brothers). Rāma, I have surpassed them all (in prowess). At first sight
of thee, I approach thee, thou best of men, as my husband with (feelings
of) love. I am endeued with power, and range about at will by virtue of
my strength. Become my husband for ever and a day. What wilt thou do
with Sitā? Deformed and unsightly, she is not worthy of thee. I am fit
for thee. Do thou look upon me as a wife. This unsightly grim unchaste
and human one with a lean abdomen, will I devour up, along with this
brother of thine. Then having thy wish, in company with me, thou wilt
range the Dandakas, surveying the various mountain summits and forests."
Thus addressed, Kākutstha having charming eyes, well skilled in speech,
with a smile, began to speak thus.

   ²¹ Another reading is: _my brother is named Rāvana—a Rākshasa, and
      lord of Rākshasas. He is the son of Viasavan. Thou mayst have
      heard of him.—T._




## SECTION XVIII.


With a smile, Rāma jestingly addressed Surpanakha who had been ensnared
in the noose of love, in soft words, saying, "Gentle one, I am already
wedded; this is my beloved wife. To females like unto thee co-wife-hood
is exceedingly miserable. This young brother of mine is good-looking,
and is of an excellent character; he is graceful, and is still unwived.
The powerful one is named Lakshmana. He hath not yet tested the
pleasures of a wife’s company, and is desirous of having a spouse. And
he is youthful and of an inviting presence. He will become a fit husband
for thee, considering this thy beauty. O thou of expansive eyes, seek
this brother of mine as thy husband, even as the solar beam seeks Meru.
(By doing so), thou O supremely beautiful damsel, wilt not have to fear
a co-wife." Having been thus addressed by RAma, the Rākshasi intoxicated
with lust, at once leaving Rāma, spake unto Lakshmana, saying, "I am fit
to be thy wife possessed of transcendental grace, having regard to this
beauty of thine. And with me thou wilt happily range these Dandakas."
Thus accosted by the Rākshasi, Sumitri’s son, Lakshmana versed in
speech, with a smile appropriately observed unto Surpanakhā, "Why
wishest thou to be the servant of me who am a servant myself?²² O
lotus-hued one, I am dependant on my noble brother, O thou of expansive
eyes, be thou securing the _summum bonum_, with a joyful heart, become,
O superbly beautiful wench, the younger wife of the noble one of great
good fortune. Renouncing this frightful, unchaste, hideous, old wife
possessed of a lean abdomen; he will devote himself unto thee. O paragon
among damsels, O supremely charming lady, what man possessed of
discernment, passing by such grace, would bear affection to a human
female?" Thus accosted by Lakshmana, that hideous one having a lean
abdomen being incapable of understanding jest, took his words as true.
Thereupon as that subduer of enemies, the irrepressible Rāma, was seated
in the cottage in company with Sitā, the Rākshasi, transported with
lust, said unto him, "Forsaking this deformed, unchaste, horrible old
wife of thine possessed of a lean abdomen, thou dost not regard me.
To-day, thou looking on, I shall eat up this human female. And I shall,
rid of a co-wife, happily range with thee." Having said this, even as a
mighty meteor striketh Rohini, that one having eyes resembling live
coals, waxing exceedingly enraged, rushed towards that (damsel) with the
eyes of a doe. Thereupon, hindering the Rākshasi resembling the noose of
death, as she was rushing on, the mighty Rāma, growing wroth, said unto
Lakshmana, "O Saumitri²³, what is the good of jesting with a base and
wicked one? No use of doing it. Look, O amiable one, Vaidehi²⁴ is well
nigh dead. It behoves thee, O foremost of men, to deform this frightful,
unchaste Rākshasi of a huge abdomen, transported with lust." Thus
desired the exceedingly strong Lakshmana, fired with wrath, taking out
his sword, in the sight of Rāma, cut off her nose and ears. Her ears and
nose cut off, the terrible Surpanakhā, uttering frightful cries, fled
amain into the forest whence she had come. And being deformed, and
covered with gore, the dreadful Rākshasi sent up many a roar, like
clouds rumbling in the rains. And bleeding profusely, the grimvisaged
Rākshasi, lifting up her arms, and roaring, entered the mighty forest.
Then, having been deformed, (the Rākshasi) approaching, her brother of
fierce energy, Khara, come to Janasthāna, (seated surrounded by numbers
of Rākshasas), fell down to the earth, even as the thunder-bolt bursts
from the sky. Then that sister of Khara, bathed in blood, and deprived
of her senses through fright, related ail about Rāma’s arrival at the
forest along with Lakshmana and his own wife, as well as the
circumstances connected with her being deformed.

   ²² The text is difficult to render literally:—_Why wishest thou to be
      the female servant of me who am myself a male servant.—T._

   ²³ We are obliged to use this epithet as it is in order to prevent
      the too frequent recurrence of _Sumitra’s son.—T._

   ²⁴ _Videha’s daughter_. We retain this epithet also for the reason
      assigned above.—T.




## SECTION XIX.


Seeing his sister deformed, and covered with blood, fallen on the
ground, the Rākshasa, Khara, fired with wrath asked her, saying, "Arise!
Leave off fear and amazement. Tell me plainly by whom thou hast been
thus deformed. Who is it that with his finger-end hath by way of sport
hurt a black venomous snake that was innocent? He that coming in contact
with thee hath to-day drunk virulent poison, winding a fatal noose round
about his neck, knoweth it not through ignorance. Endowed with strength
and prowess, ranging about at will, wearing shapes at pleasure, and
resembling the destroyer himself, going to whom hast thou come by this
condition? Who among the gods, Gandharbas or creatures or the high
souled saints is of such mighty energy as to have deformed thee? In this
world I do not see him that would do me wrong. Even as a crane afflicted
with thirst appropriated milk mixed in water (leaving the latter out),
so by means of fleet and life destroying shafts will I among the
immortals take the life of that chastiser of Pāka, the thousand-eyed
mighty Indra. The frothy blood of whom, having his marrow pierced (by
me) and slain by me in battle, doth the Earth wish to drink? Tearing off
flesh from the corpse of whom slain by me in conflict, shall the birds
so joyfully feed on it? Him, whom I shall wrong mightily, neither the
gods, nor the Gandharbas, nor the Piçāchas²⁵, nor the Rākshasas, will be
able to rescue in fierce encounter. Recovering by degrees thy sense, it
behoves thee to tell me what individual it was of execrable character,
who by his prowess, hath humbled thee in the forest." Hearing these
words of his brother, who was under the influence of extreme rage,
Surpanakhā. with tears in her eyes, said, "Tender, and endowed with
beauty, possessed of youth and gifted with great strength, with
expansive eyes resembling white lotuses; clad in bark and dark
dear-skins, subsisting on fruits and roots, having their senses under
control; leading an ascetic life and a Brahmacharya mode of existence;
there are two sons of Daçaratha the brothers Rāma and Lakshmana
resembling the Sovereign of the Gandharbhas and marked with signs
betokening royalty. I cannot ascertain whether they be celestials, or
human beings. And between them I saw there a youthful female furnished
with grace, and having a dainty waist; adorned with every kind of
ornament. And it is on account of this female that I have like one
unchaste and uncared for, have come by this condition at their hands.
Nor I wish in the midst of encounter to drink the frothy blood of that
crooked one as well as those two slain (in battle). Let this my prime
wish be crowned there with fruition. Her and their blood will I drink in
dreadful conflict." As she said this, Khara wrought up with boundless
passion, said, "Two human beings accoutred in arms, and wearing bark and
dark deer-skins have in company with a female entered this deep Dandaka
forest. Do ye return, after slaying them, as well as that wicked one.
And this sister of mine will drink their blood. Ye Rākshasas, even this
is my sister’s dear desire. Repairing thither, speedily accomplish this,
bearing them down by your native might. Seeing those two brothers slain
by you. this one, exceedingly rejoiced, will drink their blood in the
field." Thus commissioned, those fourteen Rākshasas set out there like
clouds driven by the winds, accompanied by Surpanakhā.

   ²⁵ A kind of foul spirits.—T.




## SECTION XX.


Then the grim Surpanakhā, coming to Rāghava’s asylum pointed out to the
Rākshasas those brothers in company with Sitā. And they saw the mighty
Rāma seated in the cottage in company with Sitā, and ministered unto by
Lakshmana. And seeing her, as well as the Rākshasas who had come, Rāma
remarked unto his brother, Lakshmana of flaming energy, saying, "O
Sumitra’s son, do thou for a while guard Sitā. I shall slay these that
have come to this asylum here." Hearing these words of Rāma versed in
the knowledge of self, Lakshmana honored his speech by saying, "So be
it." And the righteous Rāghava strung his mighty bow decked with gold;
and addressed the Rākshasas, saying, "We that have entered into this
untractable forest of Dandaka in company with Sitā are the sons of
Daçaratha, the brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana. Why do you intend to do
injury unto us. Subsisting on fruits and roots, having our senses under
control, carrying on asceticism and leading a Brahmacharya life, we are
passing our days in the forest of Dandaka. It is to destroy you, wicked,
and troublesome that I equipped with the bow have come here at the
desire of the saints. Stay there content you should not move further. If
you have a care for your lives, desist, ye rangers of the night."
Hearing those words of his, those fourteen grim Rākshasas bearing darts
in their hands, exceedingly enraged, with their eyes reddened, breathing
high spirits, harshly said unto the sweet-speeched Rāma, having his eyes
reddened, whose prowess they had not seen before, "Having excited there
our lord, the high-souled Khara, it is thou that shalt lose thy life no
later than this day, being slain by us in battle. What power hast thou,
being one, to stay before us many, in the field,—what shall I say of thy
coping with us in conflict? In consequence of the _parighas_, darts, and
_pathifas_ discharged by our arms, thou wilt surely lose thy life, along
with thy prowess, and this bow which thou pressest with thy hand."
Having said this in wrath, those fourteen Rākshas uplifting their
weapons and daggers rushed towards Rāma and discharged darts at the
invincible Rāghava. Thereupon Kākutstha by means of shafts decked with
gold, cut off those fourteen darts of theirs. Seeing this, that
exceedingly energetic one, waxing highly enraged, took out fourteen
_nārāchas_, whetted on stone, resembling the sun. And even as Satakratu
hurls the thunderbolt, Rāghava drawing his bow and taking his aim at the
Rākshasas, let go those shafts. And those Rākshasas, their breasts
pierced with vehemence, and themselves bathed in blood, fell down to the
earth, like snakes dropping down from an ant hill. And with their
breasts pierced, they, dripping with blood, deformed and deprived of
their lives, lay on the ground like trees whose roots have been severed.
Seeing them fallen on the ground the Rākshasi, beyond herself in wrath,
approaching Khara, with her blood a little dried up, again in
distressful guise threw herself on the earth, like a plant exuding gum.
And in presence of her brother, she set up a mighty roar; and then her
face grown pallid, she dropped tears, emitting cries. Seeing those
Rākshasas slain in battle, Surpanakhā again hastened (to her brother),
and the sister of Khara, related detail the slaughter of those
Rākshasas.




## SECTION XXI.


Seeing Surpanakha again lying on the ground, Khara in anger spake out
unto that one, who had come to bring on evil, saying, "I had but
recently commissioned for thy behoof those heroic Rākshasas living on
flesh. Why then dost thou again weep? Bearing regard and attached unto
me, and ever engaged in my welfare, they, assailed by others, are
incapable of being slain; nor do they not obey my orders. What can it
be? I would hear of the occasion owing to which again, crying ’Ah lord,’
thou rollest on the earth like a serpent. Why dost thou beweep like one
forlorn, while I thy lord, am living? Arise! Arise! Do not fear, cast
off thy stupor." Thus addressed, and consoled by Khara, that
irrepressible one, wiping her eyes, spoke unto Khara, "Having had my
nose and ears cut off, I had come hither, covered with blood; and thou
hadst consoled me. And thou also hadst despatched fourteen heroic
Rākshasas, for my behoof, for slaying the terrific Rāghava along with
Lakshmana. But all those, bearing ill will (towards Rāma), bearing darts
and _pathsas_ in their haads, have been slain in conflict by means of
weapons penetrating into the vitals. Seeing those possessed of great
speed, in a moment laid low on the ground,—as well as (witnessing)
Rāma’s mighty deed, great fear hath taken possession of me. O ranger of
the night, I am afraid, and agitated, and cast down. I have (at length)
found in thee a refuge, seeing fear on all sides. Wilt thou not rescue
me who am sinking in this ocean of grief, having sorrow for its
alligators and affright for billows? And these Rākshasas, living on
flesh who had arrived at that place, have been slain by Rāma with
sharpened shafts. If thou hast any kindness for me as well as those sons
of Rākshasas and, O ranger of mght, if thou hast strength and energy to
cope with Rāma, do thou kill this thorn of the Rākshasas, who hath set
up his dwelling in the forest of Dandaka. If thou do not to-day slay
that destroyer of foes,²⁶ Rāma, I shall banishing shame, give up my life
in thy very presence. Meseems, thou backed by thy forces²⁷ art incapable
of staying in battle before Rāma in high encounter. Thou plumest thyself
on being a hero; but art really none such. Prowess hath been falsely
attributed unto thee. Go off from Janasthāna without delay, along with
thy friends. O Stainer of thy line, do thou in battle slay those
fool-hardy ones. But if thou fail in slaying those human beings, Rāma
and Lakshmana, then how canst thou void of strength and of slender
prowess, stay here? Overcome by the energy of Rāma thou shalt speedily
meet with destruction. Daçaratha’s son Rāma, is endued with energy. His
brother is possessed of high vigour by whom I have come to be deformed."
Having thus bewailed long, that Rākshasi, possessed of a spacious
abdomen, through sorrow, became bereft of her senses before her brother,
and excercised with great grief cried, striking her abdomen with her
hands.

   ²⁶ Another reading is _that enemy of mine.—T._

   ²⁷ Some texts—(Rāma) _equipped with the bow.—T._




## SECTION XXII.


On being thus taunted by Surpanakhā, Khara spoke these sharp words in
the midst of the Rākshasas, "Arising from this thy humiliating censure,
my wrath is beyond compare. I can not bear it, like salt-water cast on a
sore. From my prowess I count not Rāma who is a human being possessed of
a frail life—him who slain by me shall to-day in consequence of his
misdeed give up existence. Restrain thy tears, and remove thy fear. I
shall despatch Rāma along with his brother to the abode of Yama. Thou
shalt, O Rākshasi, quaff on the ground the hot blood of Rāma of evil
life, slain by my axe." Overjoyed on hearing the words that dropped from
Khara’s mouth, she again through fickleness extolled that foremost of
Rākshasas, her brother. At first reprimanded by her and then praised,
Khara spoke unto his general, named Dushana, saying, "Do thou, O gentle
one, array fourteen thousand of those Rākshasas, gifted with furious
vehemence, ever following my wish, who never turn away from the field;
who are hued like unto purple clouds, who revel in cruelty,²⁸ and who
are elated (in consequence of their prowess). And thou gentle one, do
thou at once bring my car as well as my bows, and pasty colored arrows
and scimitars, and darts, and various whetted javelins. O thou versed in
warfare, for slaying this haughty Rāma, I go in the very fore-front of
the high-souled Paulastyas.²⁹ As he said this, Dushana brought his great
car hued like the sun, yoked with excellent steeds of various colors.
And thereupon in a passion Khara ascended that car resembling a peak of
Meru, embellished with burnished-gold, furnished with golden wheels,
open; having its pole studded with lapises; surrounded with fishes and
flowers and trees and stones, and the sun and the moon and gold, and
auspicious articles; and swarms of birds, and stars; having streamers
and swords; garnished with bells; and yoked with superb coursers. And
beholding that mighty army consisting of cars and arms and pennons,
Khara as well as Dushana, said unto that multitude of Rākshasas, "March
forth!" And then uttering tremendous roars, rushed out with great
vehemence four and ten thousands of those terrible Rākshasas equipped
with clubs and _pattisas_ and darts and sharpened axes, and scimitars
and discuses,—shining beautifully in their hands and saktis and dreadful
_parighas_ and innumerable bows, and maces, and _mushalas_ and _vajras_
fearful to behold, griped fast. And those following the will of Khara
issued out of JanasthSna. Seeing those Rākshasas of dreadful forms
rushing out, Khara’s car remaining a little away (from the press),
proceeded after a short space. Then taking the permission of Khara, the
charioteer drove at speed those powerful steeds decked in shining gold.
And driven with speed, the car of Khara—slayer of foes—filled all
directions with its rattle. And Khara, fired with wrath, and having
piercing voice, hastening to destroy his enemy like the Destroyer
himself, again urged his charioteer with roars, like a mighty cloud
showering down stones.

   ²⁸ The North-West Province’s text has some additional
      _sloka_:—_Dreadful, wearing forms at will, possessing the pride of
      the lion, having large mouth, high-souled, revelling in cruelty,
      endeued with strength, of fierce energy.—T_.

   ²⁹ _Lit.—Pulastya’s sons_. The Rākshasas were commonly descended from
      _Pulastya.—T._




## SECTION XXIII.


As those terrible and inauspicious forces were marching on, a mighty
sable cloud with dreadful sounds began to shower down blood. And the
steeds yoked to his (Khara’s) car, gifted with great celerity, dropped
down all of a sudden on the level high ways strewn with blossoms. A dark
circle bordered with red, resembling that of charcoal, appeared in the
vicinity of the sun. And a frightful vulture, having a huge body,
approaching the banner, sat upon the upraised golden flagstaff. And
beasts and birds having shrill voices, living on flesh, remaining near
Janasthāna, emitted various dissonant notes. And in the quarter lighted
up by the fierce jackals having mighty voices, in dreadful cries
presaged evil unto the Rākshasas. And terrific clouds surcharged with
water and blood, and resembling elephants with rent temples, enveloped
the sky. And a dense darkness appeared, capable of making one’s hair
stand on end, and no quarter was distinctly visible. And out of season,
there appeared evening hued like a cloth soaked in blood. And facing
Khara, terrible beasts and birds set up cries. Kankas, Gomayas and
vultures, portending fear, began to cry. Ever inauspicious in war,
jackals presaging evil, with their mouths belching forth flame, howled
in the face of the forces. And comets, resembling _parighas_ appeared
beside the sun. That mighty planet Swarbhānu seized the sun when there
was no _parva_. And the winds blew violently; and the sun was without
lustre. And when there was no night, stars wearing the sheen of
fireflies, began to fall. And in the tanks fishes and fowls were inert,
and the lotuses were withered. And at that hour the trees were shorn of
fruits and flowers; and without wind there arose dust dusky like clouds.
And the parrots uttered wild notes—_chichikuchi_. And meteors of
terrific aspects fell with loud noises. And the earth with her
mountains, woods, and forests, shook. And as the intellegent Khara was
roaring from his car, his left arm shook, and his voice fell, and as he
surveyed around, his eyes moistened, and his head ached; yet through
ignorance, he did not desist. Witnessing these mighty portents capable
of making one’s hair stand on end, Khara with a laugh, addressed the
whole body of Rākshasas, saying, "Even as a strong person from prowess
counts not a weak one, I do not dwell upon all these mighty portents,
dreadful to behold, that have appeared. Even the stars will I bring down
from heaven with my sharp shafts; and even Death will I engaged, bring
to mortality. Without slaying Rāghava puffed up with pride as well as
Lakshmana, by means of sharp weapons, I return not (from the conflict).
Let that sister of mine, for whom Rāma and Lakshmana have had sense
perverted, attain her desire, by drinking their blood. I had never
before met with defeat in conflict. Ye have witnessed it. I do not speak
a falsehood. Wrought up with rage, I shall slay in fight the sovereign
of the celestials himself, going on his mad Airāvata, with the
thunderbolt in his hand,—what shall I say of those two, who are human
beings? Entangled in the noose of death, that mighty army of the
Rākshasas, hearing his challenge, experienced boundless enthusiasm. And
anxious to see the encounter, there came high-souled saints, and
celestials, and Gandharbas, and Siddhas, with the Charānas. And these
pious ones assembled, spoke unto one another, "Welfare unto those cows,
and Brāhmanas, and those that are prized by the worlds! As the
discus-handed Vishnu vanquished the foremost Asuras, may Rāghava rout in
battle those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya! And saying
this as well as various other things, the supreme saints and the
celestials stationed in the sky conceiving curiosity (as to the issue of
the conflict), beheld the host of those Rākshasas, whose days had been
numbered. Then impetuously Khara issued in his car from the van of the
army.³⁰ And these twelve endowed with exceeding prowess, _viz._,
Synagāmi, Prithuçyāma, Yaynaçatru, Vihangama, Duryyaya, Karavirāksha,
Purusha, Kālakānuka, Maghamāli, Mahāmali, Sarpasya, and Rudhirāçana
posted themselves around Khara. And Mahākapāla, Slhulāksha, Hramāthi and
Triçiras³¹—[These four going before the forces, went at the back of
Dushana]. Then as the planets dart towards the sun and moon, that heroic
and dreadful army of Rākshasas, eager for victory suddenly rushed
towards the princes with great vehemence.

   ³⁰ The N. W. P. text has a different _sloka. And seeing him come out
      on the ground, they themselves came out.—T._

   ³¹ The sloka in the text is incomplete: The part within brackets,
      taken from the N. W. P. recension completes it.—T.




## SECTION XXIV.


When Khara of fierce prowess had come to the asylum Rāma in company with
his brother saw all those evil prognostics. And beholding those dreadful
portents, Rāma exceedingly distressed, apprehending some calamity to the
Rākshasas, observed unto Lakshmana, "O mighty armed one, behold these
great presages that have taken place, capable of annihilating all
beings, and which have for their object the utter extermination of the
Rakhasas! Yonder threatening clouds of assinine sable, showering down
blood and uttering loud sounds are ranging the welkin. And, O discerning
one, rejoicing at the prospect of my fight, all these arrows emit smoke,
and my bows plaited on the back with gold, are restless. Meseems from
the noise of the wild birds that impending on us is danger and
uncertainty to life. Without doubt, there shall take place a mighty
conflict. At this critical time, my arm shaking momentarily, betokens, O
hero, victory unto us, and defeat unto the enemy. And thy face appeareth
pleasant with a delightful lustre. O Lakshmana, the pallid face of those
that prepare for conflict, auger shortening of life. We can hear the
shouts of the Rākshasas as they roar, as also the blasts of the trumpets
of those doomed to be wounded blown by Rākshasas of remorseless deeds. A
considerate person that wisheth for his welfare, apprehending peril,
should prevent disaster ere it arrives. Therefore bearing arrows in thy
hand, and equipped with thy bow, do thou, taking Videha’s daughter, take
refuge in the mountain cavern, covered with trees and difficult of
access. That thou shouldst act contrary to my words, is what I do not
wish. Swearing by my feet, go thou without delay, my brother. Thou art
both strong and a hero: Thou canst, without doubt, slay these
(Rākshasas). But I wish to slay all these rangers of the night myself."
Thus accosted by Rāma, Lakshmana, taking arrows and a bow, took refuge
in an inaccessible cave along with Sitā. Thereupon, saying, "Ah! we have
spoken it sharp," Rāma put on his mail. And adorned with that mail
resembling fire Rāma appeared in the dark like a mighty flame streaming
up. And uplifting his bow, and taking his arrows, that powerful one
stood there, feeling all directions with the twangs of his bow-string.
Then the high-souled gods and Gandharbas, Siddhas and Charanas came
there, with the intention of witnessing the fight. And high-souled
saints of the world, and the foremost Brahmarshis, of pious acts, coming
together, spoke unto one another, saying, "Hail to cows and Brāhmanas,
and all those in whom are established the worlds! May Rāghava vanquish
in fight those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya, even as
the discus-handed Vishnu routed in battle the foremost Asuras!" Having
said this, they again spoke, eying one another, "There are fourteen
thousand of the Rākshasas of dreadful deeds, while the righteous Rāma is
single. How can fight take place (between two such parties)?" Having
said this, the Rajarshis, Siddhas, multitudes of the beet of the
twice-born ones, and celestials stationed in the sky were moved with
curiosity (as to the issue of the conflict). Then seeing Rāma filled
with energy, remaining in the field, all beings from fear experienced
great pain. And the peerless grace of Rāma of energetic deeds became
like unto that of the high souled infuriated Rudra.³² While the gods,
Gandharbas and Charanas were thus conversing, the forces of the
Rākshasas sending up solemn sounds, furnished with horrible armour, arms
and flags, conversing in heroic parlance, roaring at each other,
stretching bows, momentarily yawning,³³ sending forth shouts, and
blowing trumpets. The universal uproar filled that (entire) forest.
Scared and terrified at the hubbul the rangers of the wood fled to
quarters free from noise; nor did they cast their eyes backward. And
that army resembling the ocean, and rife with sounds, equipped with
various weapons, with furious speed came towards Rāma. And Rāma also
versed in warfare, casting his eyes arround, found the forces of Khara
ready for fight.³⁴ Then stretching his dreadful bow, and swiftly taking
out shafts, (Rāma) for compassing the destruction of the entire body of
the Rākshasas, waxed furiously enraged. And like unto the flaming fire
at the universal dissolution, he, growing wroth, was incapable of being
looked at. And seeing him filled with energy, the sylvan deities were
extremely pained.³⁵ And the aspect of the enraged Rāma appeared like
that of the holder of Pināka, intent upon destroying Daksha’s sacrifice.
Furnished with bows and ornaments and cars and mail hued like fire, that
army of those subsisting on flesh, appeared like masses of blue clouds
at sunrise.

   ³² There is a variation in reading here; the sense, however, is the
      same.

   ³³ The commentator says the yawning was in consequence of the
      soldiers having during the conflict indulged in liquor.—T.

   ³⁴ Another text:—The holder of _pinaka.—T._

   ³⁵ Another reading is:—The sylvan deities fled away.—T.




## SECTION XXV.


Coming to the asylum, Khara in company with those that went before him,
saw that slayer of foes, the enraged Rāma, holding his bow. And seeing
him, Khara possessing a shrill voice, raising his bow, commanded unto
the charioteer to drive towards Rāma,—" Drive on!" At Khara’s command,
the charioteer drove the steeds to where the mighty-armed Rāma stood
alone, holding his bow. And seeing him (Khara) entered the field, all
those rangers of the night—the counselors—uttering mighty shouts,
environed him round. And Khara stationed on his car in the midst of
Rākshasas appeared like red bodied one risen in the midst of the stars.
Then in battle Khara, afflicting Rāma of incomparable energy with a
thousand shafts, uttered a tremendous roar. Then all the rangers of the
night, waxing exceeding wroth, showered various weapons on that terrible
bowman, the invincible Rāma. And wrought up with rage, the Rākshasas in
battle assailed him with iron clubs, and darts, and _prāsas_, and
swords, and axes. And resembling clouds (in hue), the exceedingly strong
Rākshasas, having huge bodies, darted towards Kākutstha by means of
steeds and cars. And mounted on elephants resembling mountain-peaks,
numbers of Rākshasas, intent upon slaying Rāma in battle, showered
arrows on him, as mighty clouds pour down showers on the monarch of
mountains. And Rāma was hemmed in by all those fierce-looking Rākshasas
even as in the evening Mahādeva is surrounded by his courtiers. And as
the ocean resisteth the tide of a river, Rāghava by means of arrows
resisted the weapons discharged by the Yatudhānas. As a mighty mountain,
assailed by the thunderbolt, doth not feel pain, Rāma, having his person
pierced by terrible flaming weapons, did not feel pain. And pierced, and
with his person covered with blood, Rāma, the descendant of Raghu,
resembled the sun enveloped in evening clouds. And seeing him single,
surrounded by many thousands, the Gods, Gandharbas, Siddhas, and supreme
saints became sorrowful. Then Rāma getting enraged, bringing his bow to
a circle, discharged sharpened shafts by hundreds and by thousands. And
as if in sport, Rāma in the conflict shot irrisistible (shafts)
furnished with Kanka feathers, and decked with gold, irrisistible,
capable of inflicting extreme pain, and resembling the noose of Death.
And sportively discharged by Rāma, those arrows deprived the Rākshasas
of their lives, like the noose forged by death. And piercing the persons
of the Rākshasas, those arrows, soaked in blood, going up to the sky,
appeared with the splendour of flaming fire. And innumerable shafts,
exceedingly fierce, capable of depriving the Rākshasas of their lives,
were let go from the circle of his bow. And with those Rāma severed
bows, in battle by hundreds and by thousands and flag ends, and shields,
and mail, and many arms with embellished hands, resembling the trunks of
elephants. And the arrows of Rāma discharged from the string pierced and
cut off steeds mailed in gold, yoked unto cars, together with the
charioteer; and elephants with their riders; and horsemen with horses.
And slaying foot-soldiers, he despatched them to the abode of Yama. And
cut off with _nālikas_ and, _nārāchas_, and sharp-pointed _vikirnas_,
the rangers of the night uttered dreadful howls of distress. And like a
withered wood afflicted by fire, that host harassed by the various
marrow-piercing³⁶ shafts shot by Rāma, did not attain ease. And some
heroic rangers of the night possessed of great strength, waxing furious,
threw³⁷ at Rāma _prasas_, and darts and axes. Thereupon resisting by
means of shafts those weapons of theirs, the mighty-armed Rāma endeued
with prowess, took their lives in the conflict, and cut off the heads
(of warriors). And having their heads, and shields and bow-strings,
severed, they fell as fall on the earth trees thrown down by blasts from
the wings of Suparna.³⁸ Those rangers of the night that remained there,
wounded by arrows, and losing heart, fled with speed to Khara, to seek
his protection. Thereat, encouraging them, Dushana, taking his bow, ran
furiously in high rage against Rāma, like the enraged Destroyer himself.
And rallied again (by Dushana) and, their fear dispelled through their
having found refuge with him, they armed with _sālas_, _tālas_, and
crags, darted against Rāma. And bearing in their hands darts, and clubs,
and nooses, those exceedingly strong ones showered in battle shafts and
weapons. And the Rākshasas discharged vollies of trees and crags. And
capable of making one’s hair stand on end, that battle was dreadful and
furious and now on the side of Rāma and now again on that of the
Rākshasas. And waxing exceedingly wroth, they bore on him hard from all
sides. Then finding all directions entirely covered with Rākshasas, and
showers of shafts, that one gifted with mighty strength, sending up a
terrific shout, fixed (on the bow-string) the exceedingly effulgent
Gandharba weapon (for discharging it) among the Rākshasas. Then
thousands of shafts went forth from the circle of his bow; and all
directions were covered with thronging arrows. And those Rākshasas,
afflicted with arrows could not see Rāma how he took out his dread
shafts, nor how he discharged those excellent shafts; they only saw him
drawing his bow. And the darkness spread by the arrows enveloped the sky
with the sun. And Rāma stationed there continued pouring in shafts. And
the earth was covered with shafts shot, and alighting, and alighted
simultaneously. And at places were seen Rākshasas by thousands slain,
falling, enfeebled, torn and riven. And cut off by Rāma with arrows,
darts and _Patticas_ in that battle the fearful field was scattered,
heads with turbans, arms with finger-fences; torn thighs and arms, and
various ornaments, horses, excellent elephants and cars, shattered in
numbers, chouris, fans, and umbrellas, and pennons of various
descriptions. Beholding all those stain, the (remaining) Rākshasas, sore
distressed, could not (again) advance before that captor of hostile
capitals Rāma

   ³⁶ Another reading is, _sharpened.—T._

   ³⁷ Another reading: _remaining before Rāma, threw powerful
      weapons.—T._

   ³⁸ _Lit.—Of fair feathers_. A name of Garuda.




## SECTION XXVI.


Finding his own forces slaughtered, the mighty-armed Dushana speedily
ordered five thousand Rākshasas, gifted with tremendous velocity,
difficult of being approached, who never turned from the field. And from
all sides they incessantly showered darts and _patticas_, and scimitars,
stones, and trees, and shafts. Thereupon by means of shafts the
righteous Rāghava resisted that mighty destructive shower of trees and
stones. Resisting that shower, Rāma with his eyes staring, and
resembling a bull, flew into a great rage, for the purpose of slaying
the whole body of Rākshasas. Then influenced by wrath, and flaming in
energy he on all sides covered the army along with Dushana with arrows.
Then the general, Dushana, destroyer of enemies, getting wroth, opposed
Rāghava with arrows resembling thunderbolts. Then heroic Rāma highly
angered, severed his (Dushana’s) mighty bow with shafts sharp as razors,
and slew his four horses by means of as many shafts. And having slain
the steeds, he (Rāma) cut off the head of the charioteer by means of a
crescent-shaped weapon, and pierced the (Rākshasa Dushna) in the breast
with a brace of shafts. His bow cut off, his steeds together with the
charioteer slain, and himself deprived of his car, he (Dushana) took a
_parigha_ resembling a mountain peak, able to make one’s down stand on
end plated with gold, capable of afflicting celestial hosts, studded
with sharp iron _sankus_, and graced with the fat of foes;—of the touch
of a thunderbolt, able to pierce the persons of enemies.³⁹ And takng up
in that encounter the _parigha_ resembling a mighty snake, that ranger
of the night of cruel deeds Dushana, rushed towards Rāma. And as Dushana
was rushing forward, Rāghava by means of a couple of shafts cut off his
two arms with the ornaments. And the huge _parigha_ escaping from
(Dushana’s grasp) fell forward on the field like the banner of Sakra.
And like a mighty elephant whose husks have fallen off, Dushana, on his
arms having been severed, fell down to the earth. Seeing Dushana down on
the ground, and slain in battle, all creatures, saying, "well done!"
"well done!" paid homage unto Kākutstha. In the meantime, three
generals, getting wroth, being entrapped in the noose of death, rushed
against Rāma in a body—viz; Mahākapāla, Sthulākshya, and the mighty
Pramāthi the Rākshasa, Mahākapāla, upraising a large dart, and
Sthulākshya, taking a _pathica_, and Pramāthi, an axe. And as soon as
Rāghava beheld them advance, he resisted them by means of sharp and
keen-edged shafts, even as one receives guests that have come. And
Raghu’s son split Mahākapāla’s head,—afflicted Pramāthi with countless
shafts, and lodged the eyes of Sthulākshya with sharp shafts. And they
fell down to the earth like mighty trees of many boughs. Thereat
instantly inflamed with wrath, Rāma by means of five thousand shafts,
sent as many thousands of Dushana’s followers to Yama’s abode. Hearing
that Dushana had been slain, Khara, waxing wroth, commanded his mighty
generals, saying, "Fighting with that vile man, Rāma, along with his
mighty forces Dushana hath been slain in battle, together with his
followers. Let all the Rākshasas slay him with weapons of various
shapes." Having said this in wrath, Khara darted towards Rāma. And
discharging choice shafts, Syenagāmi Prithugriva, Jajnasatru, Vihangama,
Durjaya, Paravirāksha, Parusha, Kālakārmuka, Hemamāli, Mahāmāli,
Sarpāsya, and Rudhirāçana,—these twelve generals endeued with mighty
prowess accompanied with their forces, proceeded vehemently against
Rāma, discharging excellent shafts. Threat with shafts resembling fire,
and decked with diamonds and with gold, (Rāma) possessed of energy
destroyed the rest of his (Khara’s) forces. And as the thunderbolt
slayeth the mighty, Asuras, those shafts studded with gold, and like
onto smoking fire, slew those Rākshasas. And in in the field Rāma slew
an hundred Rākshasa with an hundred Karnis, and a thousand (again) with
a thousand. And, their armour and ornaments severed, and their bows
broken in shivers, those rangers of the night fell down on the earth,
bathed in blood. And as a spacious dais is covered with Kuça, the entire
field was scattered with the Rākshasas fallen in battle with hair
dishevelled, and covered with blood. And at that time that fearful
forest, with the Rākshasas slaughtered, and with its clay mired with
flesh and blood, resembled hell itself. Fourteen thousand Rākshasas of
dreadful deeds were slain by Rāma single, a human being, fighting,
(moreover) on foot. And the remnant of his (Khara’s) forces were that
mighty car-warrior, Khara himself, and the Rākshasa, Triçira; and (on
the other side) was that destroyer of foes—Rāma. The rest of the
Rākshasas, gifted with great prowess, terrible and difficult of being
withstood, were all slain in battle by The dear brother of Lakshmana.
Then seeing that dreadful army destroyed in terrible conflict by the
mighty Rāma, Khara ascending a great car, advanced before Rāma, like
Indra with the upraised thunderbolt.

   ³⁹ The text may also mean—_able to rend the cities of foes.—T._




## SECTION XXVII.


As Khara was advancing before Rāma, that leader of the army named
Triçira, approaching him, said, "Do thou employ me, who am possessed of
prowess; and thyself desist from this rashness. Behold the mighty-armed
Rāma brought down in battle. I swear (unto thee) truly; I touch this
weapon, (to say) that I will slay Rāma, who deserves to be slain by all
the Rākshasas. Either I shall prove his death in battle, or he shall
prove mine. Restraining thy martial ardour, do thou for a while become a
witness. Either, joyed in consequence of Rāma being slain, thou shalt
repair unto Janasthāna; or I being slain, thou shalt enter the field
(against him)." Thus satisfied by Triçara, from his desire to meet with
death, the latter, on being permitted with "Go," proceeded towards Rāma.
And like a hill with three summits, Triçira rushed towards Rāma on an
effulgent car yoked with steeds. And as a mighty cloud pours down
shower, (Triçira) discharging vollies of shafts, uttered a roar
resembling the sound of a wet kettledrum. And seeing that the Rākshasa
Triçira was advancing, Rāghava resisted (his attack) by discharging
sharpened shafts. And that encounter of those exceedingly powerful ones,
Rāma and Triçira was fierce, like unto that between a lion and an
elephant. Then struck on the forehead by a brace of shafts shot by
Triçira, the wrathful Rāma enraged, and inflamed with anger, said, "Ah!
such is the strength of the heroic Rākshasas! I have been wounded in the
forehead with shafts resembling flowers. Do thou also take the arrows
shot from my bow." Saying this, (Rāma) enraged, and influenced by wrath,
wounded Triçira in the breast with fourteen arrows. And that energetic
one by means of four shafts having their joints bent, brought down his
four steeds. And by means of eight arrows (Rāma) laid low the charioteer
from the front of the car. And Rāma with a shaft severed his upraised
standard. Then as that ranger of the night was descending from his
broken car, Rāma pierced his breast with arrows,—and thereat he was
stupified. Thereupon, that one of immeasurable prowess, out of anger by
means of three shafts possessed of celerity, brought down Triçira’s
three heads. And that ranger of the night present in the field,
afflicted by the shafts of Rāma, after his heads had fallen first, fell,
vomitting smoking gore. And the Rākshasas remaining after the rest had
been slain, belonging unto Khara’ s original forces losing heart, began
to flee like deer terrified at a hunter. And seeing them fly, Khara
waxing wroth, swiftly making them desist, darted towards Rāma, like Rāhu
darting towards the Moon.




## SECTION XXVIII.


Seeing Dushana slain in fight along with Triçira, Khara, witnessing
Rāma’s prowess, was filled with fear. And seeing that irrisistible
Rākshasa host—even Dushana and Triçira—slain by the mighty Rāma alone,
and seeing the great courage that was made in the army, that Rākshasa,
Khara, was seized with despondency. Then as Namuchi advances against
Vāsava, Khara stretching his powerful bow, advanced against Rāma. And
Khara hurled at Rāma nārāchas reveling in blood, resembling infuriated
venomous snakes. And repeatedly twanging his bow, Khara, mounted on his
car, began to range the field, displaying his weapons through his
acquired skill. And that mighty car-warrior covered all sides with his
shafts. And seeing this, Rāma of a tremendous bow with shafts incapable
of being borne, and resembling tongues of flaming fire, entirely
enveloped the welkin, even as a cloud poureth down showers. And with the
sharpened shafts shot by Khara and Rāma, the entire firmament on all
sides was thronged. And as each enraged was engaged in coping with the
other, the sun, enveloped in a net-work of shafts, did not appear. And
as a mighty elephant is struck with the goad, Rāma in the conflict
attacked (his opponent) with _nālikas_ and _nārāchas_ and sharp-pointed
_vikirna_. And as that Rākshasa sat on his car, bow in hand, all
creatures saw him, as if he were the very Destroyer with the noose in
his hand. And at this time Khara thought that Destroyer of all his
forces, established in his manliness, the exceedingly powerful Rāma to
be overcome with fatigue. And seeing that one powerful like the lion,
and gifted with the vigorous gait of the lion, Rāma was not moved, as a
lion seeing a puny deer (is not moved). And then as an insect falls into
a flame, Khara mounting a mighty car, resembling the sun, approached
Rāma. And, displaying his lightness of hand, Khara severed the bow of
the magnanimous Rāma, with the arrow (fixed on it) at the place where it
is grasped. Then taking up seven other shafts, resplendent like the
thunderbolt of Sakra, Khara, enraged, sent them into (Rāma’s)
main-joints, and then afflicting Rāma of unparalleled energy with a
thousand shafts, Khara sent up in that conflict a loud shout. And riven
by the shafts discharged by Khara, Rāma’s mail resembling the sun fell
to the ground. And pierced with those arrows, all over his body, and
inflamed with rage, Rāghava appeared in the field, like a smokeless
flaming fire. Then that destroyer of foes, Rāma, for compassing the end
of his enemy, stringed another mighty bow, sending forth solemn
sounds,—the redoubtable Vaishnava bow that had been conferred on him by
the Maharshi. And uplifting that superior bow, Rāma rushed against
Khara. Then with shafts having bent knots and golden feathers, Rāma,
wrought up with rage, severed in battle Khara’s standard. And on that
exceedingly graceful golden standard being hewn down it seemed as if the
sun dropped to the earth at the behest of the celestials. And thereat
Khara, understanding the import of things, fired with wrath, pierced
Rāma’s breast with five arrows, like one striking an elephant with a
goad. And Rāma on being pierced with a good many shafts discharged from
Khara’s bow, and having his body bathed in blood, was highly wroth.
Thereupon that foremost of bowmen, and weilder of a mighty bow, taking
six shafts, let them go, after aiming at them. And with one shaft he
pierced Khara’s head, with two his arms; and with three arrows headed
like half-moons, Rāma wounded Khara in the chest. Then that highly
energetic one, influenced by anger, assailed the Rākshasa with thirteen
_nārāchas_ whetted on stone and with one that exceedingly powerful one,
cut the yoke of the car, with four the four steeds, with the sixth the
head of Khara’s charioteer, with three the stout _trivenu_ of the car,
with two the wheel, and with the twelfth, severing as if in sport
Khara’s bow with his hand,⁴⁰ with the thirteenth, resembling the
thunder-bolt pierced Khara in the encounter. Then with his bow
shattered, deprived of his car, (Khara) having his horses slain as well
as his charioteer killed, taking a mace in his hand leaped to the
ground, and stood there. And the celestials and Maharshis exceedingly
rejoiced, assembled in the welkin in a body, and with joined hands
extolled that feat of that mighty car-warrior Rāma.

   ⁴⁰ Another text reads: _with the arrow set.—T._




## SECTION XXIX.


And to Khara deprived of his car standing with a mace in his hand, that
exceedingly energetic one, Rāma, preluding his speech with mildness,
spake, "Backed by this mighty host abounding in elephants and horses and
cars, thou hast done an exceedingly wicked deed, execrated by all the
worlds. Even if one happen to be the lord of the three worlds, one given
to troubling creatures, and who is cruel and engaged in wicked acts, can
not exist. All persons destroy, like a snake that hath intruded itself,
him that doth cruel deeds, hostile to the interests of every one. People
delightedly behold the end of him that doing an action either from
covetuousness or desire, doth not like a Brāhmain wallowing a Karakā,
see the consequence thereof. What, O Rākshasa, dost thou gain by
slaughtering exceedingly pious ascetics engaged in righteous acts,
living in the forest of Dandaka? Like unto trees whose roots have been
reduced, cruel persons, execrated of men, who perpetrate iniquitous
acts, do not exist long. And as a tree puts forth blossoms in season,
the doer of sinful deeds, at the hour (of repentance) inevitably reaps
their fruit in the shape of dreadful anguish, of the spirit). And, O
ranger of night, as the effect of having taken rice mixed with poison,
appears without delay, even so also people readily reap the fruit of
their own acts. O ranger of the night, it is to take the lives of the
perpetrators of dreadful sins, who wish ill unto men, that I the king
have come. Today the gold-decked arrows discharged by me, piercing (thy
body), shall enter into the earth, cleaving it, like serpents falling
into an ant-hill. Slain in battle, thou shalt in company with thy army,
follow those people practising piety, whom thou hast devoured in the
Dandaka forest. Today let those great saints, who had formerly been
slain by thee, stationed in the sky, behold thee slain (in turn) with my
arrows, and inhabiting hell. Do thou strike as thou lik. And thou that
art of an odious race, do thou put forth thy energy. Today I will bring
down thy head, even as a palm falls to the ground." Thus addressed by
Rāma, Khara enraged and beyond himself with passion, with eyes reddened,
replied, "O son of Daçaratha, why having slain inferior Rākshasas in
battle, dost thou praise thyself without reason? Those foremost of men
that are puissant and powerful, do not, inflated with their energy,
mouth (their own consequence). It is the mean-minded Kshatriyas of
impure heads that magnify themselves among men, even as thou O Rāma,
dost. What hero, when the hour of his death hath approached, publishes
in the field his own lofty lineage and sings his own hymn. As brass
wearing the semblance of gold, displays its own defect on being
heated,⁴¹ with a fire lit with Kuça,⁴² so thou hast betrayed thy own
lightness by this speech of thine. Thou dost not see me staying here
mace in hand, like a moveless mountain dyed in metals, bearing mobile
and immobile things. I can, mace in hand, deprive thee and the three
worlds to boot clean of your lives, like the very Destroyer with the
noose in his hand. But I will not parley much with thee as much as I
could wish: the sun is going to set, and our fight shall be interrupted.
Fourteen thousand Rākshasas have been slaughtered by thee. I will for
their deaths wipe their tears to-day." Saying this, Khara, highly
enraged, hurled his mace⁴³ provided with golden rings at Rāma, like unto
the blazing thunder-bolt. Thereat, reducing to ashes trees and shrubs,
that mighty flaming mace, discharged by Khara’s arm, fell before Rāma.
And Rāma severed in many fragments that mighty mace, resembling the
noose of Death, as ascending the welkin, it was coming down. Thereupon,
like a she-serpent brought down by force of incantations, the mace fell
to the earth shattered and riven.

   ⁴¹ _i.e. becomes dusky_, as Rāmanuya intelligently remarks.—T.

   ⁴² Another reading is, _lit with husks._

   ⁴³ Another reading is, _plaited with gold._




## SECTION XXX.


Cutting off the mace with his shafts, Rāghava attached unto
righteousness with a smile said unto Khara these angry words, "Thou
vilest of Rākshasas, this is the utmost of thy might, which thou hast
displayed. Rendered more nerveless at my hands, in vain dost thou storm.
Riven by my shafts, thy mace, belonging unto thee who art prolix in the
matter of vocabulary, destroying thy confidence, hath saught the earth.
And what thou hadst said,—’I will wipe the tears of the Rākshasas that
have been slain,’ hath also proved false. As Garuda stole ambrosia, will
I deprive thee, O Rākshasa, who art base, of a mean disposition and a
false character, of thy life. To day the earth shall drink the blood
vitiated with foamy bubbles, of thee, having thy throat severed, and
riven by my shafts. Having all thy body covered with dust, and thy two
arms lopped off, thou shalt, difficult to win, take thy nap, embracing
the earth, like a damsel difficult to win. On thee, disgrace of
Rākshasas, lying down, and being fast asleep, this Dandaka shall be
refuge of those that shall resort to it for shelter. O Rākshasa, in thy
Janasthāna, with its (Rākshasas) slain by my shafts, ascetics shall
fearlessly go about in the wood. Today Rākshasas, capable of exciting
fear in others, rendered forlorn and with their friends slain, shall
from fear, with their faces wet with tears, fly (this place). To day thy
wives whose husband art thou of such a nature,—and who are of a like
lineage (with thyself),—shall experience the sentiment of sorrow, and be
deprived of their all. Thou of a cruel disposition, thou of ignoble
soul, thou that art aye a thorn (in the side) of Brāhmanas, it is for
thee that ascetics, frightened and dispirited, have so long been pouring
the clarified butter." As Rāghava, influenced by anger, said this in the
field, Khara from wrath, with accents rendered harsher, fell to
censuring (Rāma). "Thou art wondrous proud: and thou art fearless albeit
fear is present unto thee. And come under the sway of death, thou dost
not understand what should be said and what left unspoken. Those persons
that have been fast bound by the noose of death, do not in consequence
of their senses having ceased to perform their functions, descern what
is proper and what improper." Saying this unto Rāma, that ranger of the
night (Khara), pursing his brows, espied a mighty _sala_ hard by. And
looking about him on all sides in the field for a weapon, he uprooted
it, biting his nether lip. And raising up the tree with his arms, and
uttering a roar, that exceedingly powerful one aiming at Rāma discharged
it, exclaiming,—"Dead thou art." And as it descended, the puissant Rāma
cut it off by means of a multitude of shafts, got into a mighty rage for
the purpose of slaying Khara in battle. Then Rāma perspiring, with eyes
reddened in wrath, pierced Khara in battle with a thousand shafts. And
blood mixed with froth gushed by the sides of the shafts, like torrents
flowing from fountain in a hill⁴⁴ stupified in battle by the shafts shot
by Rāma, and maddened by the smell of blood, Khara furiously made for
Rāma. And as he (Khara) was rushing on, bathed with blood, Rāma equipped
with arms, suddenly summoning his strength walked backward two or three
paces. Then with the view of bringing about (Khara’s end) Rāma took up
in the conflict an arrow resembling fire or another weapon of Brahmā
himself. And that righteous one shot at Khara that (arrow), which had
been conferred on him by the intelligent Maghavān. And discharged by
Rāma from his bent bow that mighty arrow with the roaring of the
thunderbolt fell at Khara’ s breast. And burning in the fire of the
arrow, Khara fell down on the earth, like the giant Andhaka⁴⁵ in the
forest of Sweta, consumed by Rudra. And threat Khara slain fell down
like Vritra slain by the thunder-bolt, or Namuchi by foam,⁴⁶ or Vala by
Indra’s _Acani_. After this, the celestials, assembled with the
Chāranas, struck with wonder joyfully sounded kettledrums and showered
blossoms on Rāma. "In over half a moment Rāma by means of sharpened
shafts hath slain in mighty encounter fourteen thousand Rākshasas,
wearing shapes at will, headed by Khara and Dushana. Ah! mighty is the
feat achieved by Rāma knowing self. Ah! this mighty prowess, this mighty
firmness, show like unto those of Vishnu himself." Saying this all the
deities went to from where they had come. Then the Rājarshis in company
with supreme saints, with Agastya (at their head), gladly paying homage
unto Rāma, said the following words, "It is for this that the chastiser
of Paka, the great Indra, Purandra, had paid a visit to the sacred
asylum of Sarabhanga. And the Maharshis had dexterously brought thee to
this place, for compassing the destruction of those foes—the wicked
Rākshasas. And it is owing to this, that, O son of Daçaratha, thou hast
performed this mighty deed. (Now) the Maharshis will carry on their
proper pious offices in the Dandaka." After this, that hero, Lakshmana,
accompanied with Sitā came out of the mountain cavern, and joyfully
entered the asylum. Then the victorious and heroic, Rāma, honored by the
Maharshis, entered the asylum, worshipped by Lakshmana. And seeing that
destroyer of foes, and bringer of comfort unto the Maharshis, her
husband, Vaidehi embraced him. And seeing the multitudes of Rākshasas
slain, Janaka’s daughter, beholding the undeteriorating Rāma, ministered
unto him with supreme joy. And with a delightful countenance again
embracing that destroyer of foes, who had been honored by the delighted
Maharihis, Janaka’s daughter became exceedingly happy.

   ⁴⁴ The text varies slightly in other texts.—T.

   ⁴⁵ The Asura Andhaka was slain in the forest of _Sweta_ by Rudra.
      This is related in the Puranas. Another reading is _Swetarayge
      yathantaka like the Destroyer in the forest of Sweta_. Swa,
      according to the _Kurma Purana Uttra Khanda_, in the Kalanyara
      hill, by a kick with his left leg slew the Destroyer, engaged in
      pennances, who had come to kill the Rajarshi Sweta, who was a
      great votary of Siva.—T.

   ⁴⁶ Namuchi was slain by a thunder-bolt laid over with foam.—T.




## SECTION XXXI.


Then Akampana bestiring himself, speedily issuing out of Janasthāna,
spake unto Rāvana, "0 king, a great many Rākshasa living in Janasthāna,
have been slain, and Khara also hath been slain in battle. I alone have
with much difficulty managed to come here." Thus addressed, the
ten-necked one, flaming up in energy, with his eyes reddened in wrath,
said this unto Akampana, "Who, having his days numbered, hath ravaged
the dreadful Janasthāna? Who shall no more wend the way of all beings?
Doing me a bad turn, Maghavan himself, or Vaiçravana, or Yama, or
Vishnu, cannot attain happiness. I am the destroyer of the Destroyer
himself; and I burn even very Fire. And I can bring death itself to
mortality. I can by my impetus resist the force of the wind. And when
enraged, I can by my energy consume the Sun and Fire." Thereat,
Akampana, with joined hands, from fear replied to the ten-necked Rāvana,
in faltering words, beseeching courage. Thereat that foremost of
Rākshasas, the ten-necked one, granted him courage. Then inspired with
confidence, Akampana without fear spoke, "There is a son of Daçaratha,
youthful, resembling a lion⁴⁷, named Rāma of broad shoulders, and
possessed of excellent beauty of long and mighty-arms. (He) is
sable-hued, of high fame, and of matchless prowess and vigor. It is he
that in Janasthāna hath slain Khara with Dushana." Hearing Akampana’s
words, that lord of the Rākshasas, Rāvana, breathing like a mighty
serpent, said these words, "Tell me, O Akampana, hath Rāma come to
Janasthāna, accompanied with the sovereign of the celestials and the
body of the immortals? Again hearing Rāvana’s words, Akampana described
the strength and energy of that high-souled one. (He) is named Rāma, and
is exceedingly energetic; the foremost of all bowmen— furnished with
celestial panoply; and is possessed of pre-eminent prowess in warfare.
Like unto him in strength, of red eyes, and gifted with a voice like the
sound of a kettledrum, his younger brother, Lakshmana has a countenance
resembling the full-moon. He hath met with him (Rāma) as the wind
meeteth with a flame. He is endeued with grace, and is the foremost of
monarchs. It is he who hath ravaged Janasthāna. The magnanimous gods did
not come there. No doubts need be entertained on this head. The
feathered shafts, plated with gold near the plumed part, becoming
five-mouthed serpents ate up the Rākshasas. Wherever oppressed with fear
the Rākshasas go, they see Rāma stationed before them. In this way, O
sinless one, hath Janasthāna been exterminated by him." Hearing
Akampana’s words, Rāvana said, "I will go to Janasthāna for slaying Rāma
with Lakshmana." When he had said this, Akampana said, "Hear, O king,
the true report of Rāma’s prowess and manliness. Enraged, the highly
famous Rāma cannot by putting forth vigor be checked. And by means of
his shafts, he can make river in full flood turn its course. And he can
bring down from the sky its stars and planets, and that graceful one can
recover the depressed Earth. And that lord can submerge all creatures by
riving the continents of the sea, and with his shafts can resist the
onset of the ocean, and the wind; and that illustrious one that foremost
of persons by virtue of his vigor, destroying the worlds, can again
create all creatures. O ten-necked one, forsooth, Rāma cannot be subdued
in conflict, either by thee or the world of Rākshasas, as heaven is
incapable of being attained by a sinner. I deem him incapable of being
slain by all the Gods and Asuras together. This alone is the means of
slaying. Do thou heedfully listen to it! He has a wife of sterling worth
in the world, and that slender-waisted one is known by the name of Sitā.
She is in the full bloom of youth, and hath a symmetrical person—a jewel
among womankind embellished with jewels. And neither a goddess, nor a
Gandharbi, nor yet an Apsari, nor a Pannagi is equal to her; and what is
a human female? Thrashing him, do thou in the mighty forest, carry away
his wife. Without Sitā, Rāma shall cease to exist." Thereupon, the lord
of the Rākshasas, Rāvana, happened to relish those words; and reflecting
(a while), that mighty-armed one addressed Akampana, saying, "Excellent
well. I will go there alone, accompanied by my charioteer only. I will
this very morning with a glad heart bring Vaidehi to this spacious
palace." Saying this, Rāvana departed, lighting up all sides, on a
sun-shiny car, yoked with mules. And coursing the firmament, that mighty
car of that foremost of Rākshasas looked like the Moon among clouds. And
proceeding far, he, approaching the asylum (of Taraka’s son), presented
himself before him. And Māricha entertained the king with meats and
drinks passing human. And having entertained him personally with a seat
and water (to wash the feet), Māricha spoke these pregnant words, "O
king, O lord of the Rākshasas, is it well with the worlds? I am filled
with fear: I apprehend that all is not right, since thou hast come
hither (alone) in such post-haste speed." Thus addressed by Māricha, the
highly energetic Rāvana, versed in speech, said, "My child, the guards
(of Janasthāna) have been slain by Rāma of untiring energy; and all
Janasthāna, incapable of being slain, hath (by him) been brought down in
battle. Do thou, therefore, assist me in carrying away his wife."
Hearing these words of the lord of Rākshasas, Māricha said, "What enemy
of thine in the guise of a friend, hath spoken of Sitā unto thee? And, O
foremost of monarchs, who, having been, entertained by thee, doth not
bear thee good will?⁴⁸ Tell me, who is it that hath told thee, ’Bring
Sitā hither?’ Who is it that hath set his heart on severing the summit
of the entire Rākshasa world? He must be thy enemy that excites thee to
this. Of this there is not the least doubt. He wishes to extract through
thy agency the fangs of a venomous snake. Who (intends) to lead thee
astray by imposing on thee such a deed? Who, king, hath struck in the
head, thee that wast slumbering in peace? Rāghava in war is like a mad
elephant, having an unblemished ancestry for his trunk, perspiration for
his temporal exudation; and arms resting well beside him for his tusks.
O Rāvana, thou art not competent even to look at him. Thou ought not to
rouse up the sleeping man-lion, that slayer of skillful Rākshasas
resembling deer, with his sport in the field, for his joints and down;
arrows for his body and sharp scimitar for his teeth. O Sovereign of the
Rākshasas, thou ought not to plunge thyself into this dreadful, and
abysslesss ocean, having the bow for its alligators, activity of arms
for its shine, arrows for its billows, and engagement for its waters. Be
propitious, O lord of Lankā! O foremost of Rākshasas, with a contented
heart, thou hadst better go thy way to Lankā. Do thou ever sport with
thy own wives: let Rāma in company with his wife, sport in the woods."
Thus addressed by Māricha, the ten-throated Rāvana desisted, and entered
Lankā the best of capitals.

   ⁴⁷ Another reading is _Viranga: rupopeta: possessed of handsome
      person._

   ⁴⁸ Another reading is—_ko na nandati ninditi; who having been
      insulted by thee, doth not rejoice (in thy prosperity)_, and,
      therefore, in the garb of friend-ship, hath done thee this
      wrong?—T.




## SECTION XXXII.


Seeing fourteen thousands of Rākshasas of dread deeds, together with
Dushana, and Khara, and Triçira, slain in battle by Rāma single-handed,
that one resembling clouds, Surpanakā, again fell to send up mighty
sounds. And witnessing Rāma’s deeds, incapable of being performed by
others, she, extremely agitated, went to Lankā, ruled by Rāvana. And she
saw the effulgent Rāvana in front of his palace, surrounded by his
counsellors, like Vāsava surrounded by the Maruts; seated on a supreme
golden seat resembling the sun, and like unto a flaming fire on a golden
dais kept alive by sacrificial offerings; unconquerable by high-souled
saints, celestials, Gandharbas and all creatures; terrible like the
Destroyer with his mouth wide open; his persons containing scars⁴⁹ of
wounds inflicted by the thunderbolt and the lightnings, in the war
between the gods and Asuras; his breast bearing marks of attacks made by
Airāvata with the ends of his tusks;—having twenty hands and ten
heads,—wearing elegant attire; broad breasted; heroic; marked with royal
signs; (in hue) resembling cool lapises; embellished in ornaments of
burnished gold; having goodly hands, white teeth, and a huge face
resembling a hill;—even him who in the war of the gods had been assailed
an hundred ways with the descent of Vishnu’s discus; whose body had been
cut with all the weapons of the celestials; (him) who furiously disturbs
the deep incapable of being disturbed; uproots mountain summits, and
tramples over gods,—the destroyer of righteousness, and the violater of
other’s wives;—the employer of all celestial arms, and the disturber of
sacrifices;—who going to the city of Bhagab and vanquishing Vāsaki, had
carried off Takshaka’s beloved wife; who, going to Kailaça, and
defeating him having for his vehicle a human being, had carried off the
car Pushpaka coursing at every where at will; who endeued with prowess
had devastated the divine Chaitraratha grove, the tank (situated there)
and the Nandana wood,—as well as the gardens of the gods; and, who,
himself resembling a mountain summit, had by means of his upraised arms,
obstructed the rising of these repressor of foes the exalted Sun and
Moon; who, possessed of calmness, having formerly for ten thousand years
carried on asceticism in the mighty forest, offered his own heads unto
the self create one; who in conflict fears, not death from either gods
or Dānavas or Gandharbas, or Piçāchas or birds or serpents, from none
save human beings; who, possessed of prodigious strength, forcibly takes
away the clarified butter sanctified with mantras from the sacrificial
ground; the destroyer of sacrifices about to be completed; of villanous
nature; the slaughterer of Brāhmanas; of cruel deeds; harsh and
kindless, and ever bent on doing evil unto all creatures; and railing
furiously at all creatures; the inspirer of fear in all beings. And the
Rākshasi beheld her exceedingly powerful and cruel brother, wearing
gorgeous apparel and ornaments, and decked in a glorious
garland,—seated, like the Destroyer at the time (of dissolution) ready
(to destroy); the exalted chief of Rākshasas; the delight of the race of
Paulastya. Stupified with fear, the Rākshasi, approaching that destroyer
of foes; Rāvana, surrounded by his counsellors, said these words. And
transported with fear and desire, Surpanakhā, given to fearlessly
ranging every where, who had been deformed by that high-souled one,
showing (her mutilation), addressed these harsh words unto Rāvana of
flaming and expansive eyes.

   ⁴⁹ This reminds one of Milton: of Belzebub, he says,— "——————— His
      person, Deep scars of thunder had intrenched—_Par. Lost_,—Book 1




## SECTION XXXIII.


Then the woe begone Surpanakhā, in high wrath spoke harshly in the midst
of the courtiers, unto Rāvana, given to railing loudly against all
creatures, "Intoxicated with enjoyments, acting as thou wilt, and
without any control whatever, thou dost not see that a dreadful disaster
is impending. The subjects do not esteem a monarch that is given to
sensual enjoyments, is intent upon satisfying his lust and is covetous
like the fire in a cemetery. The king that doth not act at the proper
time, finds destruction along with his kingdom and acts. Even as
elephants shun the muddy river, do people shun from a distance, the
ruler that doth not send out spies, who showeth not himself (unto his
subjects), and who hath lost his independence. Like unto rocks in the
sea, those monarchs that do not administer their dominions, that are not
dependent, do not prosper. Having incurred the hostility of the gods,
the Dānavas and the Gandharbas of subdued souls and senses, how canst
thou, who art fickle, and hast not employed spies, become the king? And,
O Rākshasa, thou art childish and foolish; and doth not know what thou
shouldst. How canst thou then become the king? O thou best of
conquerers, those kings whose spies, exchequer and morality are not
free, are like the common herd. It is because kings know distant dangers
through spies, therefore they are styled far-sighted. I believe thou
hast no spies, and that thy counsellors are common folks, since although
Janasthāna with thy kinsman is destroyed, yet thou takest it not to
heart. Fourteen thousands of Rākshasas of dreadful deeds, with Khara and
Dushana, have all been slain by Rāma single-handed; Rāma of untiring
energy hath inspired the saints with courage; the Dandakas have been
benefitted; and Janasthāna hath been harassed. But thou, covetous and
intoxicated and in the power of others, dost not understand that a great
danger is overhanging (thee). People do not in times of peril assist a
sovereign that is wrathful, stingy, intoxicated, haughty and deceitful.
Even his own kindred slay a sovereign that sets inmense store by his own
self, is of light worth, regards himself highly, and irascible. They do
not serve him; nor do they fear when he intimidates them. Such an one is
speedily dethroned; and reduced to poverty and becomes like a straw.
Even dry wood may serve a purpose; or stone, or dust; but no purpose is
capable of being served by a sovereign that hath been cast off his
place. Like a cloth that hath been worn, like a garland that hath been
trodden, a king that hath been dethroned, although able, is of no
consequence. But a king that keeps his wits about him, understands
everything, is of controlled senses, and grateful, and of virtuous
character, endureth for ever. That king is honored by men, that sleeping
with his eyes, is awake as respects his eye of duty, and (the effects
of) whose anger and favor, are seen (by all). But, thou Rāvana, who hast
not by means of spies, acquainted thyself with the slaughter of
Rākshasas, art of evil understanding and bereft of all these virtues,
given to disgracing others, ignorant of the proper distribution of time
and place,⁵⁰ and never taking care to distinguish merits and defects,
thou, thy kingdom being in danger, wilt speedily meet with disaster." On
his vices having been thus celebrated by her (Surpanakhā), that lord of
the rangers of night, Rāvana, musing awhile, was long plunged in
thought.

   ⁵⁰ The commentator, is silent here. The meaning evidently is, _thou
      dost not discern the where and when of things.—T._




## SECTION XXXIV.


SEEING Surpanakā speak harsh words in the midst of the courtiers,
Rāvana, being enraged, asked her, saying, "Who is Rāma? And what is his
prowess? And what his form? And what his power? And why hath he entered
the forest of Dandaka, difficult to range? And what Rāma’s weapons, by
means of which he hath slain the Rākshasas? And Khara hath been slain in
battle, and Dushana and Triçira. Do thou, O thou of a pleasing person,
tell me the truth. And who hath deformed thee?" Thus addressed by the
lord of the Rākshasas, the Rākshasi, transported with rage, commenced to
duly narrate all about Rāma. "Rāma the son of Daçaratha is long-armed,
of expansive eyes, clad in bark and dark deer-skin, and like Kandarpa in
grace. And drawing a bow resembling that of Sakra, decked with golden
rings, he discharges blazing _nārachas_, like unto serpents of virulent
poison. I do not see in the field, Rāma drawing his bow: I only see the
host being slaughtered by a shower of shafts. And as Indra destroys (a
field of) goodly crops, by pouring down hail stones, fourteen thousand
Rākshasas of dreadful prowess, as well as Khara and Dushana were in a
little over a moment slain with sharp shafts by Rāma alone fighting on
foot. And he hath reassured the saints, and after having been deformed,
I alone from fear of slaying a woman, have been let off by the
high-souled Rāma knowing self. His brother is endeued with mighty
energy, and in merit, is of equal prowess; and he is devoted to his
brother, and beareth him regard; the puissant one is named Lakshmana.
And wrathful and invincible and victorious, and powerful, and
intelligent and mighty, (he) is Rāma’s right-arm—his life ranging
externally. And Rāma’s virtuously wedded beloved wife, having expansive
eyes, and a face resembling the full-moon, is ever to the welfare of her
lord. And that fair-haired, fair-nosed, and fair-thighed illustrious one
possessed of beauty, graceth the forest like a goddess,—as if a goddess
of wealth herself. Of the lustre of burnished gold, with her finger
nails reddish and projecting, and graceful, that surpassingly lovely
wench is named Sitā—the slender waisted daughter of Videha. And neither
a goddess, nor a Gandharbi, nor a Yakshi, nor a Kinnari, had I seen
before on earth, possessed of such beauty. He that shall have Sitā for
his spouse, and who shall be warmly embraced by her, shall live longer
in the world than the Lord of celestials himself. That good-natured
girl, unparalleled on earth in loveliness, who can well pride herself on
her person, is a worthy wife for thee; and thou too art a fit husband
for her. It is to bring over for thee that one of spacious hips, and a
high and well-developed bust, that I had put forth my endeavours. But, O
mighty-armed one I have been disfigured by the wicked Lakshmana. As soon
as thou hast seen Vaidehi having a countenance resembling the full moon,
thou shalt be afflicted with the shafts of Cupid. If it is thy purpose
to have her for thy wife, at once stretch forth thy right leg, for
attaining success. If, O lord of Rākshasas, thou relishest my speech, do
thou then, O Rāvana, without fear, do as I tell thee. Understanding
their incapacity, do thou, O lord of Rākshasas, for making her thy wife,
by force carry away the frail Sitā of a blameless person. Hearing that
Rāma by means of straight coursing shafts hath slain the Rākshasas that
had gone to Janasthāna, and seeing Khara and Dushana, killed, do thou
ascertaining thy course, adopt it.




## SECTION XXXV.


Hearing those words of Surpanakhā, able to make one’s hair stand on end,
(Rāvana) ascertaining his course after issuing his orders to his
councellors, departed. And proposing to himself that act, weighing its
good and evil, considering his capacity or otherwise, and (finally)
determining his purpose, Rāvana with a fixed mind went to the handsome
stable. And going to the stable in disguise, the lord of the Rākshasasas
commanded the charioteer, saying, "Yoke the car." Thus asked, the
charioteer possessed of fleet vigor, in a trice, yoked an excellent car
after his heart. And ascending the car coursing at will, made of gold
and garnished with spectral faces as well as arrow decked with
gold,—resembling a mass of clouds, the graceful ruler of the
Rākshasas—younger brother to the Lord of wealth—proceeded in that
noiseless (vehicle), past the lord of rivers and streams. And with
chouris of white hair, and a white umbrella, having ten-faces,
resembling (in hue) cool lapises, wearing ornaments of polished gold,
possessed of ten mouths, and twenty arms, clad in elegant apparel,—the
foe of the celestials, and slayer of the foremost ascetics—having huge
heads like unto the monarch of mountains, the lord of the Rākshasas,
mounted on that chariot coursing at will, appeared beautiful like a mass
of clouds in the sky, with cranes, in the midst of lightning. And that
one possessed of prowess beheld the shore of the sea, containing crags,
scattered with trees bearing fruits and flowers of various kinds by
thousands, bordered all around with pools furnished with cool and
delightful waters, ornamented with spacious asylums having daises,
graced with woods of plantain, beauteous with cocoanuts, and blossoming
_sāla_ and palmyra, and _tamāla_, trees, grateful with supreme saints
rigidly restraining their fear, and with serpents and fowls of fair
feathers and Gandharbas and Kinnaras by thousands; and pleasant with
Siddhas and Chāranas, that have controlled their lust; with those
descendants of Brahmā—the Vaikhanas, the Māshas, the Vālakhilyas, and
the Marichipas; swarming with females, divinely beautiful, dight with
gorgeous ornaments and garlands, and Apsarās skilled in sport, by
thousands; frequented by the wives of the celestials, and honored by
graceful girls; ranged by multitudes of deities and Dānavas, feeding on
ambrosia; abounding with swans, Kraunchas, and frogs, echoing to (the
cries of) cranes; containing stones resembling the lapis, and mild and
cool by the influence of the ocean. And as he proceeded, the younger
brother of the Lord of wealth, saw on all sides spacious cars capable of
coursing at will, sable, furnished with fair garlands, and resounding
with trumpet notes,—and Gandharbas and Apsarās. And surveying by
thousands woods of sandal exuding gum at their roots,⁵¹ and of choice
_aguru_, grateful unto the sense of smell; and woods and groves of
excellent and odorous takkola fruits; blossoms of the Tamāla, and
thickets of black pepper; heaps of pearls drying on the shore; rocks;
the best corals in masses;⁵² summits of gold and silver;⁵³ charming
pellucid rills at places; and cities filled with corn and wealth,
abounding in gems of women, and thronged with horses, elephants and
cars—Rāvana on the shore of the ocean beheld around a level and soft
scene, resembling heaven itself—where breezes of delicate feel kept
breathing. And there he saw a fig tree, hued like clouds, surrounded by
ascetics; its branches stretched around an hundred Yoyanas, and the
exceedingly powerful Garuda had ascended one of its boughs, taking an
elephant and a huge tortoise, for the purpose of devouring them. And
that best of birds, the powerful Suparna by his weight suddenly broke a
branch containing full many leaves. And it came to pass that
Vaikhānasas, Māshas, Vālakhilyas, Marichipas, Ayas, and Dhumras,—saints
of the highest order—had assembled there. Thereat, moved by
commisseration (for the ascetics), the virtuous Garuda, taking with
promptitude the broken bough measuring an hundred Yoyanas as well as the
elephant and the tortoise, by one leg, at length eating up the animals,
and by means of the bough, exterminating the country of the
Nishadas—that best of birds attained unequalled delight in consequence
of having rescued the mighty ascetics. Thereat, attaining double energy
by virtue of that delight that intelligent one set his heart on bringing
ambrosia. And tearing off the iron links of the network, and bursting
into the repository of gem, he carried away secreted ambrosia from the
residence of the great Indra. Kuvera’s younger brother beheld this fig
tree, named Subhadra, graced with the Maharshi, on which Suparna had
left his mark. Then repairing to the other shore of that lord of rivers,
the ocean, Rāvana saw an asylum lying in the forest in a charming and
sacred recess. And there he saw a Rākshasa, named Māricha, clad in a
dark deer-skin, bearing a head of matted locks, subsisting on restricted
fare. And approaching Rāvana duly, the Rākshasa, Māricha, received the
king with every hospitality passing human. And having entertained him
personally with meats and drinks, Māricha addressed him in weighty
words, saying, "O lord of the Rākshasas, king, is it well with thee in
Lankā? And what for hast thou again come hither so speedily?" Thus
addressed by Māricha, that highly powerful one, skilled in speech,
Rāvana said.

   ⁵¹ _Niryydsurasa mutanam, gen, (sandal), which forms the principal
      ingredient in perfumes, containing odorous gums.—T._

   ⁵² Another reading is: _heaps of conch.—T._

   ⁵³ Some texts read _sailam—hills.—T._




## SECTION XXXVI.


O Māricha, hearken unto me, my child, as I relate everything unto thee).
I am distressed; and in this distress of mine, thou art certainly my
great refuge. Thou knowest Janasthāna, where lives my brother Khara, and
the mighty-armed Dushana, and my sister, Surpanakhā; as also that
Rākshasa subsisting on (human) flesh, the long armed Triçira, and many
other heroic night-rangers besides, of high enthusiasm in
battles—Rlkshasas, who had been living there at my command, troubling in
the mighty forest the ascetics carrying on their pious offices. And
fourteen thousands of Rākshasas of dreadful deeds, heroic,
high-spirited,— Rākshasas possessed of exceeding prowess; while residing
n Janasthāna of late,—clad in mail and equipped with various weapons,
headed by Khara, met with Rāma in the field. Getting enraged, Rāma in
conflict without returning any harsh speech, by means of his shafts shot
from his bow, —hath, a human being, and fighting on foot, with his
flaming arrows slaughtered fourteen thousand Rākshasas of fierce energy.
And Khara hath been slain in battle, and Dushana also hath been brought
down. And having slain Triçira too, (Rāma) hath rid the Dandaka of all
fear. Having been expelled by his enraged sire, that disgrace of
Kshatriyas, the weak Rāma, living in company with his wife hath effected
the destruction of this army. He is of a vile character, crabbed,
foolish, covetuous, of uncontrolled senses, bereft of morality, sinful,
and ever engaged in the evil of all creatures,—by whom, violently
without hostility my sister hath been deformed in the forest by having
her nose and ears cut off. Of him will I carry off by force from
Janasthāna, his wife, Sitā, resembling the daughter of a celestial. Be
thou my help in it. For certain, O exceedingly strong one, if thou help
me at my side, if my brothers also back me, I do not think much of all
the celestials. Therefore, be thou my help; for, thou art capable, O
Rākshasa. In prowess in battle, and in indomitableness, there is none
like thee. Thou art a mighty hero commanding resources, and conversant
with potent illusory displays. Taking this to my heart, I have come to
thee, O ranger of the night. Do thou listen as to the business in which
by my command thou art to help me. Becoming a golden deer, marked with
silver spots, do thou range about in Rāma’s asylum in presence of Sitā.
Seeing thee helpless, in the shape of a deer, Sitā will say unto her
lord and Lakshmana also,—"Do ye catch it." And when they shall have
departed, I shall carry off from the empty asylum, Sitā without let,
like Rāhu depriving the Moon of his splendour. Then when Rāma shall be
sore afflicted because of the carrying off of his wife, I shall easily,
crowning my soul with success, safely bear away Sitā. Hearing Rāma’s
words, the face of the high-souled Māricha became blank and he was
seized with apprehension. And licking up his dried lips, with winkless
eyes, (Māricha) as if dead, and exceedingly distressed, eyed Rāvana,
steadily. And alarmed because of Rāvana, with his mind depressed,
Māricha who well knew Rāma’s prowess in the forest, with joined hands in
agitation spoke words lending to his own as well as Rāvana’s welfare.




## SECTION XXXVII.


Hearing the words of that sovereign of the Rākshasas, the highly
energetic Māricha, skilled in speech, answered the Rākshasa chief,
saying, "0 king, the speaker of soft words is common, but the speaker
and the listner of unwelcome though beneficial words are rarities.
Volatile, and employing no spies, thou surely dost not understand the
exceedingly powerful Rāma towering high in virtues, and resembling the
illustrious Indra or Varuna himself. I shall be well, my child, if Rāma
fired with rage, do not render all the world bereft of Rākshasas; if
Janaka’s daughter hath not sprung to compass thy destruction, if a
dreadful disaster do not befall thee because of Sitā, and if having
obtained for her lord thee that art wilful and wicked, the city of Lankā
with thee and the Rākshasas do not meet with utter extermination. The
sovereign who is wicked, whimsical and of evil intent like thee,
bringeth about his own destruction as well as that of his kingdom and
relatives. Rāma, the enhancer of Kauçalya’s delight hath not been
abandoned by his father, nor is he devoid of propriety of conduct; he is
not avaricious, wicked nor the destroyer of Kastriya race. He does not
lack religious merits or accomplishments, nor is he of a harsh
temperament and intent on causing misery unto creatures. Finding his
truthful sire imposed on by Kaikeyi he has sojourned unto woods. For
compassing the welfare of his father Daçaratha and Kaikeyi he hath
entered the forest of Dandaka. Rāma, O my child is not harsh or foolish;
nor has he not control over his senses. Far from speaking untruth he
does not know false stories even. It doth not behove thee therefore to
use such improper language towards him. He is an incarnation of virtue,
pious and truthful, and lord of all men as Bāsava of all celestials. How
dost thou then wish to carry away by force his Vaidehi, protected by
virtue of her own chastity, like unto the rays of Sun? It doth not
behove thee to enter that fire of Rāma who hath arrows for rays and bow
and scimitar for fuel. It doth not behove thee, O Rāvana, to approach
Rāma renouncing thy kingdom, happiness and love of life, who is like
unto death itself and has bow for his widened and flaming mouth, and
arrows for his rays and who is irrepressible, of mighty prowess, holding
bows and arrows and repulsing the forces of the enemy. Incomparable is
his power; daughter of Janaka is his wife and lives in the forest
confiding in the mighty strength of his bow; thou shalt not be able to
carry her away. She is the beloved wife of that best of men having a
leonine chest—and he holds his wife dearer than his life and is ever
attached unto her. And young Sitā beloved of the mighty Rāma, and like
unto the rays of flaming fire is ever incapable of being carried away by
thee. Of what avail is this vain attempt O Rākshasa chief? No sooner
Rāma shall see you in the battle thou shalt meet with thy end. Hard it
is to attain life, happiness and kingdom, so it behoveth thee to act
properly, after consulting with thy ministers headed by Bivishana,
judging Rāma’s merits and demerits and ascertaining his and thy own
strength and as well as thy welfare. Methinks thy approaching conflict
with the son of the Koçala chief forebodes no good unto thee; hear again
therefore O prince of the night-rangers, words sensible and lending to
thy welfare.




## SECTION XXXVIII.


Once on a time I was engaged in travelling all over the earth. I had in
my body, resembling a huge mountain, the strength of a thousand Nāgas. I
had _parigha_ in my hands, crown on my head and golden ear-rings on my
ears and my body was of a dark blue colour like that of a cloud. Causing
fright unto the people I used to wander through the forest of Dandaka
and live upon the flesh of the Rishis. The pious ascetic Viswamitra
being afraid of me went in person to the king Daçaratha and said, "When
I shall remain absorbed in meditation on the occasion of parva, let Rāma
protect me O king, Truly am I afraid of this Māricha." Being thus
addressed by the ascetic the virtuous-souled king Daçaratha replied,
saying "Rāghava is still under twelve years of age and hath not been
well disciplined in military arts. But I have soldiers enough, and if
permitted by thee, O thou best of ascetics, I shall with my four-fold
forces kill thy enemies, the rangers of the night." Being thus addressed
that ascetic spoke unto the monarch, saying, "True it is that thou wert
the protector of the celestials in the War and thy exploits are well
known to the world, but no one shall be able to withstand the Rākshasas
but Rāma. The highly energetic Rāma, though a boy is sufficiently
qualified to defeat the enemies; therefore, O Destroyer of foes, let thy
soldiery remain here and let me proceed along with Rāma. May God bless
thee." Saying this the ascetic Viswamitra being pleased went to his
asylum along with Rāma. Afterwards having been initiated for the
sacrifice in the forest of Dandaka Rāma having unstrung his mighty bow
came to the ascetic to protect the sacrifice. He had a gold chain round
his neck, a crest on his head and a bow in his hands; he had a pair of
beautiful eyes, and only one piece of cloth; his countenance was of
green hue and exquisite beauty and even then mustaches or other signs of
manhood did not appear on his face. Beautifying the entire forest of
Dandaka with his own splendour Rāma appeared like the newly risen moon.
Thereupon I resembling a cloud and having golden ear locks entered the
asylum being proud of my power on account of the boons offered unto me
by Brahmā. Seeing me enter he took up his dart and attached string unto
his bow with proper care. Being under the influence of sheer foolishness
I passed by him as a child and darted towards the sacrificial altar of
Viswamitra. Thereupon he wounded me with a sharpened sword capable of
doing away with the enemies and threw me away into the ocean situated at
a distance of hundred yojanas. He had no mind of killing me then and for
this he saved my life. I was thrown however into the deep ocean being
hindered by the velocity of his arrows and having lost my consciousness.
Regaining my sense after a long while I returned the city of Lankā.
Myself saved thus, my followers however were all killed by Rāma of
unwearied activity though a mere child and a novice in the art of
warfare. It is for this that I do prevent thee; thou shalt be
overwhelmed with calamities and meet with destruction if dost thou
engage thyself in battle with him. In vain shalt thou bring about the
affliction of the mirthful and sportive Rākshasas ever witnessing social
festivities. And in vain shalt thou for Sitā compass the destruction of
the city of Lankā, adorned with diverse jewels and filled with golden
edifices. Pious men living with a vicious man, meet with destruction for
his sins, though they themselves do not commit any misdeed, like unto
fish (devoured by Garuda) living in a lake where snakes dwell. Thus
shalt thou witness that for thy own folly the rangers of the night,
adorned with celestial ornaments and having their body pasted with
sandal, have been killed and brought down to the earth. And they
deprived of shelter have fled away to different directions, some with
their wives and some alone, having their wives carried away (by the
enemies). Thou shalt further observe that all edifices of Lankā, being
enveloped with arrows and flaming fire have been burnt down to ashes.
There is no greater sin on earth than carrying away another’s wife.
There are a thousand ladies in thy seraglio O king. Being attached unto
thy wives do thou preserve the race of the Rākshasas, thy own line, thy
wished for life, kingdom, wealth and dignity. Do not bring about Rāma’s
mischief if dost thou wish to live happily with thy wives and friends. I
am thy friend and do ask thee again and again to desist (from thy evil
intentions); if dost thou encroach upon Sitā surely shalt thou along
with thy kinsmen go to the abode of Yama being enfeebled by the arrows
of Rāma."




## SECTION XXXIX.


I was however somehow saved by Rāma in that conflict. Listen what
happened afterwards. I was not humbled even by the danger of my life.
Once again I entered the forest of Dandaka accompanied by two Rākshasas
assuming the shape of deer. I had a flaming tongue, huge teeth,
sharpened horns and lived on the flesh of ascetics. Assuming such a
terrible appearance I began to traverse with great vehemence the
_Tirtha_, _Agnihotri_ and the place of worship; eating the flesh and
drinking the blood of the ascetics after killing them I began to hinder
all religious services. I had a most ugly figure and was maddened with
drinking blood, and all the animals of the forest were exceedingly
frightened at me. White I was thus traversing the forest of Dandaka
throwing obstacles in the way of religious services I saw the pious
ascetic Rāma living on a restricted fare, the honored Sitā and the
mighty Lakshmana, taking recourse to asceticism, moderate in eating and
ever engaged in the welfare of created beings. Remembering his former
enmity and aggrandisement, I, being extremely wrathful, in my deer shape
and with my sharpened horns, darted towards him with a view to kill him,
considering through my ignorance the effulgent Rāma as none other but an
ascetic living in the forest. Then stringing his huge bow he darted
three sharpened arrows at me. Those three terrible arrows with bent
knots resembling thunder-bolts, killing enemies and drinking blood and
having the motion of Garuda and air, coalescing with each other came
before us. Wicked as I am, I was fully aware of his prowess having been
frightend by him on a former occasion, and so I saved myself by
escaping, but those two Rākshasas were killed. O Rāvana, any how saved
from the arrows of Rāma and having got my life back I have resorted to
the life of an ascetic and have been carrying on asceticism here being
absorbed in _Yoga_.

From that very day I see Rāma wearing bark and deer skin even in the
very trees before me like unto Death with the noose in his hands.
Terrified as I am I always seeing thousands of Rāma around me. Me seems
the entire forest is inhabited by Rāma only. O king of Rākshasas, I see
Rāma even in the quarter where there is no Rāma. Seeing him in my dreams
even I look around like one awaken. O Rāvana what more shall I speak
unto thee, I am so much afraid of Rāma that such words as Ratna (jewel)
Ratha (chariot) which begin with the letter Ra administer consternation
unto me. I am fully apprised of the prowess of that descendant of Raghu;
it doth not behove thee to enter into conflict with him; he can destroy
Vāli and Namuchi. Rāvana, whether dost thou fight with Rāma or not, do
not mention him unto me if dost thou wish to see me. Many persons pious
and devoted to asceticism on this earth have met with destruction for
another’s misdeeds. And I shall meet with a similar fate for thy sins. O
thou the ranger of night do whatever thou likest, I shall not follow
thee. Truely is that highly intelligent and effulgent Rāma of mighty
prowess, like death itself unto the rangers of night. Though the wicked
Khara of Janasthāna hath been slain by him on Surpanakhā’s account, yet
how is he to blame for it? Do thou truly speak. Thou art my friend; it
is for this and for thy welfare that I speak this truth unto thee. If
dost thou not follow my words, thyself with all thy kinsmen, shall be
slain in battle by Rāma.




## SECTION XL.


As a person desirous of meeting with his end doth not take medicine,
Rāvana, the king of night-rangers paid no heed to the appropriate and
sound words of Māricha skilled in speech, foreboding good unto him.
Moreover he addressed him with the following harsh words. "O, Māricha,
what thou hast spoken unto me, shall bear no fruit like unto seeds sown
into a desert-land. I shall not be frightened thereby to fight with that
foolish Rāma—a human being of vicious deeds. Surely shall I before thee
take away from that Rāma the destroyer of Khara his favourite wife, at
whose words he has sojourned into woods renouncing his father mother,
kingdom and friends. I have made this firm resolution in my mind O,
Māricha; even Indra, with the celestials and Ashuras shall not be able
to shake it. It would have been proper for thee to give vent to these
expressions had I but asked thee for advice to ascertain my duty, the
propriety or impropriety of my action, its way or losses. A wise
counsellor who wishes prosperity unto himself should always communicate
unto his master his desire with joined hands whenever asked to do so. It
is always proper to speak before monarchs such pleasant and favourable
words as are intended for the welfare of the master and are sanctioned
by the royal etiquette. A respectable king doth not receive with good
grace friendly words even when they are expressed disrespectfully.
Sovereigns of superb prowess assume the semblance of five deities—Agni,
Indra, Moon, Yama, and Varuna. Powerful kings, O Ranger of the night,
assume haughtiness, power, a placid look and contentment and administer
punishment unto the wicked. They are to be adored and honored therefore
on all occasions. Thou art ignorant of kingly morality and fully
absorbed in illusion. It is for this that thou dost out of thy
wickedness of heart address me thy guest with these harsh words. I do
not ask thee O, Rākshasa about the propriety (of my conduct or about my
welfare. I did only ask thee for thy help. Listen what thou shalt have
to do at my request in my aid; assuming the shape of a deer having
golden skin painted with silvery drops do thou proceed to the asylum of
Rāma, and ranging at large before Vaidehi do thou after captivating her
take thy wished-for way. Vaidehi, being struck with wonder seeing thee a
golden deer capable of illusions, shall request Rāma to get thee soon
for her. Kākuthstha issuing out of the asylum, thou shalt, at great
distance utter such cries as "O Sitā, O Lakahmana" imitating his
(Rāma’s) voice. Hearing those cries Lakshmana also, at the behest of
Sitā, shall proceed to Rāma. When both Rāma and Lakshmana shall go
elsewhere in this way I shall to my felicity carry away Vaidehi like
unto the thousand-eyed deity carrying away Sachi. O Rākshasa, do thou go
wherever thou likest after doing this. I shall confer on thee, O
Māricha, half of my kingdom. O thou of auspicious look, do thou proceed
towards the forest of Dandaka to compass this end of mine; I shall
follow thee in my chariot. Acquiring Sitā without any conflict, after
imposing upon Rāma I shall return to Lankā successful along with thee. I
shall kill thee, O Māricha, if dost thou not obey my behest. I shall
compell thee to do this. No body can attain to prosperity and happiness,
acting against his sovereign’s will. Truly shalt thou risk thy life if
thou approachest Rāma, but thou shalt meet with sure destruction if dost
thou act against my will . Consider about it, and do what thou thinkest
proper.




## SECTION XLI.


Being thus commanded by Rāvana like a king to act against his will
Māricha fearlessly addressed the lord of the Rākshasas with the
following bold words, "What person of impious deeds hath advised thee O
ranger of the night thus in order to exterminate thee with thy kingdom,
counsellors and children? Who of a vicious heart, O King, doth not feel
himself happy at thy welfare? Who hath pointed out unto thee the way of
thy death under the cover of thy means? O Ranger of night surely do thy
weak enemies wish to bring about thy destruction by making thee enter
into a conflict with a powerful man. What little-minded man of evil
intent hath counselled thee thus? O Ranger of night, really do they
desire that thou dost bring destruction upon thyself by thy own actions.
Thou dost not exterminate thy counsellors O Rāvana, albeit they are
worthy of being destroyed. For they do not prevent thee entirely from
thy evil course. Wise counsellors do always restrain a king who wends a
vicious track being guided by his impulses and passions; but about thee
they are quite unmindful, though thou shouldst by every means be brought
under restraint. O thou the best of conquerors, O thou the ranger of
night, ministers by the grace of their sovereign attain virtue, wealth,
desires and fame. But those objects are never attained O Rāvana when
they are not in good odour with their sovereign; moreover the subjects
meet with dangers when he is devoid of all qualities. O thou the best of
conquerors, the king is the root of virtue and fame unto the subjects;
he should therefore be always protected by them. O ranger of night,
proud kings of cruel temperament, acting against the subjects can never
administer their kingdoms. So do the ministers of cruel counsel meet
with their end like unto a chariot driven into a wild track by an
unskilled charioteer. Many a pious person, on this earth, ever engaged
in the performance of religious services, have, for the folly of other
persons, met with destruction along with their relatives. Verily the
subjects, O Rāvana, can never expect to prosper under the regime of
hot-natured sovereigns acting against their subjects like unto deer
under the protection of a jackal. All the Rākshasas shall surely die, O
Rāvana whose lord art thou, foolish, cruel and under the control of thy
passions. I shall not be the least sorry if I do meet with a sudden
accident—what I do deplore most is that thou shalt meet in no time with
destruction along with thy soldiery. Compassing my end Rāma shall
enterminate thee in no time—and blessed I shall be being killed by an
enemy in the conflict. Surely dost thou know that no sooner shall I see
Rāma I shall be done away with; thou shalt carrying away Sitā meet with
thy end along with thy kinsmen. And if dost thou bring Sitā with me from
the asylum, none shall be saved,—me, thyself, the city of Lankā, and the
Rākshasas. Thou dost not relish my words O ranger of the night though
prevented by me, who wishes thee welfare; those men who range on the
verge of death, well-nigh finishing the term of their existence do not
receive with good grace the counsels of friends.




## SECTION XLII.


Speaking these harsh words unto Rāvana, Māricha being afraid of him
said, "We shall both go. Surely shall I be deprived of my life by him
(Rāma) taking up his scimitar and having a bow and arrows in his hands,
if I go before him again. Meeting with his prowess thou shalt never
return with thy life; he is like the noose of Death unto thee though
thou hadst baffled its power. Thou art vicious-souled, what can I do for
thee? Be thou crowned with success O ranger of the night, I shall go."
The Lord of Rākshasas being pleased with Marietta’s words embraced him
warmly and said, "This is worthy of thy heroism that thou hast addressed
thyself to act after my desire. Thou wert another Rākshasa before and
hast now become true Māricha. Do thou now with me ascend this chariot
coursing in the air, crested with jewels and driven by asses having
faces of a demon. Enchanting Vaidehi thou shalt wend thy way and away
shall I carry the daughter of the king of Mithilā by force (when there
shall be neither Rāma nor Lakshmana by her.)" Thereupon Tāraka’s son
assented to Rāvana’s words, and both of them ascending the chariot like
unto a heavenly car set out for the hermitage. And beholding diverse
towns, forests, mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities they reached the
forest of Dandaka and the asylum of Rāma. And descending now from the
golden car the lord of Rākshasas together with Māricha beheld Rāma’s
asylum. Taking him (Māricha) by the hand Rāvana spake saying "There
stands the asylum of Rāma surrounded by palm trees. Do thou do that for
which we have come here." Hearing the words of Rāvana, the Rākshasa
Māricha assuming the wonderful shape of a (golden) deer began to range
at large before Rāma’s hermitage. The points of its horns were like unto
(two) excellent jewels, its countenance was diversified with white and
black colour, its face was like a red lotus, its ears were like unto two
blue lotuses, its neck was little raised, its belly was like a saphire,
its sides were like unto Madhuka flowers, its color was like that of a
filament of a lotus, its hoops were like unto _Baidurjas_ (a gem of a
dark color); of lean thighs; of firm joints; its tail having the
diversified color of a rainbow was upraised. It was of a pleasant and
cool hue and crested with various jewels.

And in no time the Rākshasa assumed the shape of a beautiful deer. To
tempt Vaidehi that ranger of the night, assuming a beautiful countenance
painted with diverse metals, illumining the beautiful forest and Rāma’s
asylum with its beauty, and ranging at large on the green field and
living on grass, began to proceed. That one of lively presence having
its body painted with hundreds of silver drops and living on twigs of
trees began to range in the forest. Sometimes walking into the plantain
house, sometimes walking around the forest of _Karnikā_, sometimes
coming within the compass of Sitā’s vision, that best of deer having its
back painted with gold began to range slowly around the hermitage. It
began to walk at pleasure near Rāma’s asylum. Sometimes going, sometimes
stopping, at one time running very swiftly and receding the next moment,
that best of deer began to range at large. Sometimes playing around,
sometimes lying on earth and sometimes following the deer-herd having
come within the threshhold of the asylum and then followed again by them
that Rākshasa assuming the form of a deer came back to see Sitā. He then
began to range at large in the beautiful forest (extending far and
wide). Seeing him other forest-deer came (by him) and smelling him fled
away into different quarters. That Rākshasa, though expert in killing
deer, did not eat them up, though touching, inorder to hide his real
self. In the meantime Vaidehi, of auspicious looks whose eyes inebriate
like wine, being engaged in plucking flowers, was going sometimes to the
_Karnika_ grove and sometimes to the mangoe grove. That best of women,
ever inured to living in the forest and possessed of a graceful
countenance, walking and plucking flowers, saw that jewelled deer,
having its body deversified with pearls and diamonds. It had beautiful
teeth and lips and had its down resembling silver. She began to behold
with affection and with her eyes expanded with surprise. That illusive
deer seeing Rāma’s wife began to move around as if lighting up that
forest (with the fire of its beauty). Beholding that deer ornamented
with diverse jewels, and the like of which she had never seen before,
the daughter of Janaka was struck With immense wonder.




## SECTION XLIII.


Beholding that deer with its sides painted with gold and silver, while
collecting flowers, Sitā, having blameless limbs and beautiful hips and
having the color of her body like that of pure gold became immensely
pleased and called aloud her husband and Lakshmana with scimitars in
their hands. "Do thou come soon, do thou come soon, O son of the
worshipful Sire, along with thy younger brother" —having called (her
husband) again and again in this strain she continued beholding that
deer. Being thus called by the daughter of the king of Videha those two
best of men Rāma and Lakshmana, casting their looks around beheld that
deer. Seeing him Lakshmana, struck with fear, said "Methinks, this deer
is the Rākshasa Māricha. This vicious Māricha, O Rāma, assuming the
shape of a deer oftentimes kills at pleasure the kings who come here
a-hunting. He is cognizant of illusions, by virtue of which he has
assumed this shape, O best of men; its countenance is perfectly fine
like the abode of Gandharbas and resplendent like the Sun; there is no
such jewelled deer on earth. O Rāghava, O Lord of earth, there is no
doubt that this is nothing but illusion." When Lakshmana spake thus Sitā
with a pure smile being under the influence of enchantment contradicted
him, and being pleased said "O son of the worshipful Sire, this deer
hath attracted my mind, get it for me, pray, O thou of mighty arms; it
shall be an object of sport for us. Many a beautiful deer range at large
in the vicinity of our hermitage such as _Chamara_, _Srimara_, _Rik_,
_Prishata_, _Bānara_, and _Kinnara_. They are all very beautiful and of
mighty strength; but O Prince, I have never seen before the like of this
deer. In energy, strength and beauty it stands above all deer. Its
entire body is diversified with various colors, nay, it is a jewel
itself. It moves before me, beautifying the forest with its
resplendance, like unto Moon himself. Ah! what beauty, what beautiful a
lustre, how musical a voice, this wonderful deer of variegated
countenance, hath indeed captivated my heart! If canst thou get by this
deer alive, O what wonder, what surprise! When shall we regain our
kingdom after the expiry of the term of our banishment, this deer shall
beautify the interior of our palace. O Lord, truly shall this celestial
deer create surprise in Bharata, yourself, me and my mothers-in-law. O
best of men, if canst thou not get hold of it alive its skin shall also
look very beautiful (to us). Spreading on Kuça the skin of this golden
deer when killed do I wish to invoke the Almighty. It looks (no doubt)
unseemly and terrible and smacks of wilfulness on the part of a wife to
command her husband in this way, but I am sunk in surprise seeing the
countenance of the deer." Rāma’s heart was struck with surprise
beholding that wonderful deer having its down resembling gold, horns
resembling exquisitely fine diamonds, color like that of the newly risen
Sun, and resplendance like that of the orbit of the planets. Being
enchanted by its beauty and spurred on by Sitā’s words, Rāghava pleased,
spake unto his younger brother saying "Behold, O Lakshmana, it has
immensely excited Vaidehi’s desire. On account of its exquisite beauty
it shall loose its life to-day. It has its equal no where on the
earth—neither in the celestial garden nor in the Chaittraratha forest.
The hairs of its body being arranged in regular and contrary courses and
being painted with golden drops do indeed look very beautiful. Do thou
see, while expanding its mouth, its tongue comes out resembling flaming
fire like unto a thunder-bolt reaving the mass of clouds. Its face is
like a glass made of best blue saphire, its belly resembling a conch and
pearl, and it is very difficult to ascertain its shapes. Beholding it
who is there (on earth) whose heart is not enamoured? Its beauty
resembles the rays of gold and is variegated with diverse hues of
jewels. Whose heart is not enveloped with surprise beholding such a
celestial beauty, O Lakshmana? Princes, with bows in their hands,
while-a hunting in a deep forest destroy deer either for flesh or for
sport. Moreover while engaged in sporting they collect many a jewel and
various metals as gold and silver, in the woods. There is not the least
doubt that these wild riches filling up their coffers are comparatively
far better (than the wealth acquired by other sources) like unto the
objects of enjoyment, enjoyed at their fancy by the people inhabiting
the celestial region. The object which persons desirous of acquiring
wealth follow without any discretion in their actions, is the true
definition of wealth given by the political economists. Vaidehi of
slender waist desireth to sit with me on the exquisitely fine golden
skin of this gem of a deer, meseems no deer skin is so comfortable to
touch as this—neither the skin of _Kādali_, _Priaki_, _Prabeni_ nor of
_Abiki_. Truly handsome in this deer and the one that rangeth in the
welkin, indeed these two deer only are celestial—the one that rangeth in
the sky⁵⁴ (Mrigashirā) and this that rangeth on earth. And if it be a
Rākshasa’s illusion as thou sayest, O Lakshmana, then it must be killed
by me. This cruel vicious-souled Māricha made away with many eminent
ascetics, while traveling in the forest; and this Rākshasa assuming the
shape of an illusive deer destroyed many kings —mighty archers while
a-hunting in this forest; it is for this that this deer must be killed.
Formerly this _Bātapi_⁵⁵ entering into the womb of twice-born ones used
to come out reaving them like unto the embryo of a mule. Once on a time
this Bātapi approached the eminent saint Agastya and was devoured by
him. After the _Sradha_ ceremony had been over, finding that Bātapi
desirious of assuming the shape of a Rākshasa the great saint Agastya
said smiling "Being blinded with thy prowess O Bātapi, thou hast
destroyed many eminent twice-born ones on this earth and for this that I
do digest thee. Truly that Rākshasa O, Lakshmana, who wisheth to surpass
one like me who hath controlled his senses and is ever engaged in pious
offices shall meet with his end like unto this Bātapi. Therefore this
Māricha approaching me shall be killed by me like unto Bātapi being
devoured by Agastya. Do thou therefore vigilently protect Vaidehi with
mail and armours on. It is our prime duty, O descendant of Raghu, to
protect Jānaki. I shall either kill this deer or shall get hold of it.
Look, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi is extremely anxious to get the skin of this
deer, I shall therefore proceed at once, O son of Sumil to catch this
deer. The skin of this deer is the best of its kind; for certain shall
it loose its life today. As long as I do not kill this deer, O
Lakshmana, do thou with Sitā remain with vigilance in this asylum. I
shall in no time come back with its skin after killing it with one
arrow. Do thou stay here, O Lakshmana, with Jānaki in constant fear and
vigilance, along with the mighty Yatāyu, intelligent and e engaged in
pious offices.

   ⁵⁴ This refers to _Mrigashira_, the fifth lunar constellation which
      resembles a deer.—T.

   ⁵⁵ The name of an _Asur_ devoured by Agastya.—T.




## SECTION XLIV.


Having thus directed his brother, the highly energetic son of Raghu
equipped himself with his gold-hilted scimitar And girting himself with
his bow bent at three places, which served him as an ornament,—as well
as a couple of quivers that one of fierce energy sallied out. Seeing
that foremost of monarchs approach, that best of beasts from fear
disappeared; and then again showed himself. Thereat girt with the bow
and sword, (Rāma) rushed where the deer was; and beheld him illumining
all before him with his beauty,—and bow in hand (Rāma beheld) him in
that vast forest, darting away after gazing at him,—and sometimes
seeming to have got beyond arrow range, and at others tempting Rāma (by
his vicinity). And sometimes influenced by fear and bewildered, (the
deer) seemed to course the welkin; and in the forest now he became
visible and now vanished from sight. And like the autumual lunar disc
enveloped by indented clouds, he momentarily showed himself, and anon
discovered himself at a distance. And Māricha wearing the shape of a
deer, showing himself and disappearing from sight, drew Rāghava a long
way from the hermitage. Thereat Rāma, eagerly anxious to secure the
deer, being foiled by the deer, and in consequence growing enraged,
wearied out, rested under a shadow, on a sward. And that ranger of the
night, wearing the form of a deer, maddening Rāma, discovered himself
(again) at a distance surrounded by (other) deer. And Rāma desirous of
taking (the beast), seeing him again, set off at speed. At the very
moment the deer disappeared from fear; and again showed himself at a
distance behind a tree. And seeing him, the exceedingly energetic and
strong Rāghava, determined to slay him, growing wroth, taking out a
flaming shaft, resembling the rays of the sun, powerfully drew his bow,
and firmly setting the shaft, and aiming it at the deer, let go the
blazing and burning weapon forged by Brahmā, resembling a flaming
serpent. And that best of arrows, like unto a thunderbolt, deeply
pierced the breast of Māricha, wearing the shape of a deer. Thereat
bounding up high as a palmyra palm, that one whose saws had almost run
out, uttered terrible sounds, lying on the earth. And while on the point
of death, Māricha renounced his counterfeit shape. And remembering the
words of Rāvana, the Rākshasa reflected, "By what means can Sitā send
away Lakshmana, and Rāvana carry off Sitā staying in solitude?" And
pierced to the marrow by that peerless shaft, Māricha, renouncing his
deer form, resumed his Rākshasa lineaments; and giving up his life
attaining a huge person, considering the time had come (for availing
himself of the advice tendered by Rāvana), began to cry with the voice
of Rāghava, "Ah Sitā! Ah Lakshmana!" And seeing that grim-visaged
Rākshasa lying low on the ground, with his person bathed in blood, and
rolling hither and thither, Rim a proceeded towards the asylum, thinking
of Sitā. and revolving within himself Lakshmana’s words. While returning
he thought aside "Lakshmana said before that this was Māricha’s
illusion!" His words have been verified now. Truly have I killed
Māricha. Māricha has given up his ghost exclaiming aloud Ah! Sitā, Ah!
Lakshmana. I do not know what shall Sitā do hearing the cry? And what
shall the mighty-armed Lakshmana do?" While pondering thus the hairs of
the virtuous-souled Rāma stood on their end. Killing that Rākshasa
assuming the shape of a deer and hearing his terrible cry Rāma was
overwhelmed with fear arising out of sorrow. Thereupon killing a deer
and taking its flesh he hastened towards Janasthāna.




## SECTION XLV.


Hearing that cry in the forest resembling her husband’s voice Sitā spake
unto Lakshmana saying "Do thou go and learn what has befallen Rāghava.
He is crying aloud in pitiable accents; hearing them my life and soul
are incapable of remaining any longer in their proper places. It
behoveth thee to save thy brother who is crying aloud in the forest; do
thou immediately repair hence to save him, who is in need of thy help.
He hath been over-powered by the Rākshasas like unto a bullock brought
under the power of a lion," Remembering the behest of Rāma, Lakshmana
did not go, though accosted thus by Sitā. Extremely mortified, the
daughter of Janaka spake unto him saying "O Son of Sumitra, thou art an
enemy unto Rāma, in the garb of a brother. Thou dost not proceed for the
relief of thy brother who hath been reduced to such a plight. Dost thou
desire, for fine, O Lakshmana, Rāma’s destruction? Truely being under
the influence of lust for me thou dost not follow Rāghava! For this thou
dost welcome Rāma’s disaster; thou hast no affection for him. For this
it is that thou dost sit here without anxiety not seeing the highly
effulgent (Rāma). Rāma, following whom thou hast repaired unto this
forest, being in danger, of what avail is life unto me?" Vaidehi
Speaking thus being influenced by sorrow, and with tears in her eyes,
like unto a deer, Lakshmana spake unto her saying "O Vaidehi,
celestials, Dānavas, Gandharbas, Rākshasas, Asuras, or Pannagas, there
is none who can defeat thy husband. There is not the least doubt in
this. Worshipful madam! Celestials, Dānavas, Gandharbas, Rākshasas,
Picachas, men, Kinnaras, animals, or birds, there is none among them,
who can withstand Rāghava, who equals the lord of celestials in warfare.
In fact there is none who can do away with Rāma in battle. It doth not
behove thee therefore to accost me thus. Nor do I dare leave thee here
alone in this forest without Rāma. Even the mighty heroes, as the Lord
of celestials, cannot subdue his prowess with all their strength. Even
the Almighty Himself, with the celestials and the three worlds, cannot
defeat him. Do thou therefore renounce grief and console theyself.
Sooner shall thy husband return killing the best of deer. It is not his
voice nor one sent by any deity. It is but an illusion of that Rākshasa
(Māricha). O Vaidehi, thou hast been left unto my charge by the
high-souled (Rāma)—I therefore do not dare leave thee behind, O thou the
jewel of a damsel. We have made these night-rangers our enemies. For
compassing the destruction of Khara, O worshipful one, and devastating
Janasthāna, Rākshasas oftentimes use improper words unto us in this
extensive forest. O Vaidehi, to create mischief unto the pious is the
only amusement of these Rākshasas—thou shoudst not therefore be anxious
for this." Being thus addressed by him her eyes were reddened with ire,
and she spake these harsh words unto the truthful Lakshmana saying "O
cruel one! O thou the destroyer of thy line! it is a disgrace unto thee
that thou wishest to protect me (killing Rāma). Methinks, this mighty
disaster of Rāma is welcome unto thee, or else why shouldst thou seeing
this, speak thus, O Lakshmana. It is not a wonder that an evil desire
lurks in thee who art a hypocrite and a cruel-hearted enemy. Verily art
thou a monster of wickedness, that Rāma repairing unto woods, thou hast,
being lustful for me, followed him alone. Or hast thou been engaged by
Bharata to act thus? But thy or Bharata’s intention shall not be
satisfied, O Saumitre. How shall I desire another man after serving the
lotus-eyed Rāma of dark blue hue as my husband? I shall renounce my life
before thee, therefore, O Lakshmana; without Rāma I shall not maintain
my being for a moment on this earth." Hearing these brazen words of
Sitā, capable of making one’s down stand on end, the self-controlled
Lakshmana with joined hands spake unto her saying "Thou art a very
Goddess unto me, I therefore dare not answer thee. What thou hast
spoken, O Maithelee, is nothing surprising for females. Such is the
nature of womankind on this earth. Women by nature are crooked, fickle,
devoid of religious knowledge, and bring about difference between father
and son. O Vaidehi, O daugther of Janaka, truly am I incapable of
putting up with these words of thine. They have pierced through both of
my ears like a heated _Nārācha_. However the deities ranging in this
woodland are my witnesses— may they hear thee. I spoke what was fair and
have been thus addressed by thee with these harsh words. I do alawys
obey my superior’s commands. Fie on thee! Thy destruction is near at
hand that dost thou suspect me, being influenced by this womanish
nature. I shall go where Kākuthstha is, may good betide thee, O thou the
best of damsels! May the deities of the forest protect thee, O thou of
expansive eyes! Many a bad omen appear before me. May I see thee again
when I shall come back with Rāma." Being thus accosted by Lakshmana the
daughter of Janaka replied weeping and being bathed in tears. "Without
Rāma, O Lakshmana, I shall drink virulent poison, enter fire or dive
into the Godaveri. I shall destroy this body either by hanging or by
falling down from the top of a high object. I shall never be able to
touch another man but Rāma." Speaking thus unto Lakshmana, Sitā, being
enveloped with grief, weeping, struck her belly⁵⁶ with her hands. Seeing
the daughter of Janaka of expansive eyes weep thus in pitiable accents,
Lakshmana losing his attention began to console her. Afterwards the
pure-hearted Lakshmana, having control over his senses, saluting Sitā
with clasped palms and bending low a little proceeded where Rāma was,
casting again and again his glance upon her as he went.

   ⁵⁶ Properly it should be "struck her breast." But it has a special
      significance here, i. e.—she would not be satisfied until her
      belly be filled with all the Rākshasas slain.—T.




## SECTION XLVI.


Having been addressed with those harsh words the younger brother of
Rāghava, enraged, proceeded at once, being anxious to see Rāma.
Thereupon the ten-necked one, availing of this opportunity came before
Vaidehi assuming the semblance of a mendicant. Wearing a soft silken
cloth, with a lock of hair on his head with an umbrella and shoes and
having on his left shoulder a rod and _Kamandalu_, the highly powerful
one assuming the appearance of a wandering devotee carrying three long
bamboo staves appeared before Vaidehi in the forest when there was none
of the brothers by her. He saw there the young and pious daughter of the
king like unto an evening void of both sun and moon and as the highly
terrible Rāhu eyes Rohini forsaken by Moon. Seeing that terrible one the
doer of evil deeds, the trees of Janasthāna did not move nor the wind
did blow. Seeing him eye Sitā with his blood-red eyes, the fast
streaming river Godaveri even slackened its course out of fear. In the
mean time the Ten-necked Rāvana, enquiring about Rāma’s weak points
appeared before Vaidehi in the guise of a mendicant. Like unto _Sani_
approaching _chitra_, that impious one, assuming the appearance of a
pious man like a well covered with grass, approached Vaidehi who was
bewailing her husband. And seeing that pious spouse of Rāma—Vaidehi,
Rāvana stood before her. Her lips and teeth were extremely fine, her
face resembled the full moon and her eyes were like lotus-petals. She
had a yellow silken cloth on and sat in the thatched cottage,
overwhelmed with grief and bathed in tears. And that ranger of the night
with a pleased heart approached Vaidehi. Seeing her that Lord of
Rākshasas was pierced with the shafts of passion. And speaking highly of
her, surpassing in beauty the three worlds and resembling by the
excellence of her own person the very goddess of wealth herself Rāvana
uttering the name of God spake unto her saying, "O thou having the color
of gold and silver, O thou wearing silken cloth, O thou appearing like a
lotus wearing a garland of lotus-petals, O thou of beautiful
countenance! Art thou Bashfulness, Beauty, Fame, Wealth, Apsara, Dignity
or Rati herself who is ranging at will in this forest? All thy teeth are
equal having their tops like unto the buds of _Kunda_ flower, beautiful
and yellow. Thy eyes are expansive, clear, of bloody hue, and having
black pupils. Thy hip is fleshy and spacious. Thy thighs are like those
of elephants, round, fleshy and perfectly strong. Thy nipples are bulky,
pointed, highly captivating like cold palm fruits, beautiful and
ornamented with diverse jewels. O thou of beautiful smile! O thou of
beautiful teeth! O thou of beautiful eyes! O fine damsel, thou dost
carry away my heart like unto a river carrying away its banks by its
stream. The lock of thy hair is exquisitely fine, thy breast very close
and thy waist is so thin that they may be got round even by fingers.
There is none so beautiful like thee—a Goddess, a Gandharbhi, a Yakshi
or a Kinnari. I had never seen before on this earth a damsel so
beautiful as thou. This thy beauty the best on earth, thy youth, thy
grace and thy abode in the forest do agitate my mind. So it is well for
thee to come (with me); it doth not behove thee to remain here. This is
the abode of terrible Rākshasas wearing shapes at will. Picturesque
palaces, prosperous cities and sweet-smelling gardens are worthy of thy
abode. O thou of dark-blue eyes, fine is thy garland, fine is the smell
of thy person and fine is thy apparel—methinks fine is thy husband too.
O thou of pure smile! whom dost thou belong to?—Rudras, Marutas, or
Vasus— Meseems, O fine damsel thou art a very gooddes. No one comes
here—the Gandharbas, the celestials or Kinnaras; this is an abode of the
Rākshasas; how dost thou come here? Art thou not afraid of these
monkeys, lions, tigers, wolves, bears, herons and hyenas? Alone in this
forest, art thou not afraid of these terrible elephants of fierce motion
and maddened with the exuding of their temporal juice? Who art thou?
Whose wife? What for dost thou range alone in this forest of Dandaka
frequented by terrible Rākshasas?" Thus addressed was Vaidehi by the
vicious-souled Rāvana. Seeing him come under the guise of a twice-born
one, Maithelee worshipped him with diverse articles necessary for
serving a guest. Offering him a seat first and afterwards inviting him
to wash his feet she said unto that one of placid look "cooked rice is
ready." Seeing Rāvana approach with _Kamandalu_ and wearing a red cloth
under the guise of a Brahmana, Maithelee could not pass by him any way,
and considering him a twice-born one by various signs invited him as if
a Brahmana saying, "O Brahmana, do thou sit on this seat facing the
right; do thou take this water (to wash thy feet); do thou enjoy these
well-cooked eatables growing in the forest and intended for thee."
Jānaki the wife of Lord of men inviting him thus, Rāvana, casting a look
upon her, addressed himself for his own destruction, to carry her away.
She was anxiously expecting the return of Rāma who had gone a-hunting
with Lakshmana; she looked around and behold but on all sides the
spacious yellow forest-land—there was neither Rāma nor Lakshmana.




## SECTION XLVII.


"Being thus addressed by Rāvana under the guise of a mendicant, desirous
of carrying her away Vaidehi thought within herself—"This person is my
guest and a Bhahmin; he may curse me if I do not speak to him." Thinking
this for a moment Sitā said "May good betide thee! I am the daughter of
the high-souled Janaka, the king of Mithilā, the beloved Queen of Rāma
and my name is Sitā. Dwelling in the palace of Ikshakus for twelve
years, I enjoyed many things passing human and had all my desires
satisfied. On the thirteenth year king (Daçaratha) counselled with his
ministers about the installation of Rāma. Accordingly everything
necessary for the installation being made ready, Kaikeyi, one of my
mothers-in-law, begged of her husband a boon. Bringing my father-in-law
under control by means of her virtuous deeds, Kaikeyi begged, of that
truthful, best of monarchs, two boons namely the exile of my husband
into the woods and the installation of Bharata, and said "I shall never
eat, drink or sleep and (if Rāma be installed) I shall end my life."
Kaikeyi speaking thus, that lord of earth, my father-in-law begged her
to accept diverse riches; but Kaikeyi did not agree. Then the highly
effulgent Rāma, my husband was twenty-five years old, and myself was
eighteen years old counting from my birth. My husband is known all over
the world under the name of Rāma. He is truthful, good-natured, of pure
character, ever engaged in the welfare of all created beings, of
mighty-arms and expansive eyes. Our father the king Daçaratha was
entirely under the control of passions, and hence for the satisfaction
of Kaikeyi did not install Rāma. When Rāma came to his father for being
installed Kaikeyi spoke unto my husband the following cruel words, "Do
thou hear, O Rāghava, how I have been ordered by thy Sire. This kingdom,
rid of thorns is to be conferred on Bharata, and thou shalt have to
sojourn into woods for years nine and five. Do thou therefore repair
unto forest, O Kākuthstha and save thy Sire from untruth." Whereto Rāma
fearlessly replied ’So be it!’ Hearing her words my husband of firm vows
acted accordingly. He always maketh gifts and taketh none. He always
speaketh truth and never telleth an untruth. This is his best
observance, O Brahmana. His half-brother named Lakshmana is of mighty
prowess. That best of men is Rāma’s help and the destroyer of foes in
battle. That brother of his named Lakshmana is of firm resolution and
given to asceticism. With a bow in hand he hath followed (Rāma) flying
as an exile unto woods along with me. Thus that one (Rāma) of firm
resolution and ever engaged in pious offices wearing matted hair and
assuming the semblance of an ascetic hath entered this forest of Dandaka
along with myself and his younger brother. O thou the best of twice-born
ones, we three being deprived of our kingdom by Kaikeyi have been living
in this dense forest by virtue of our effulgence. Do thou take heart for
a moment and live here. Instantly shall my husband return with good many
wild fruits and roots and with sufficient meat after killing many a
deer, hog and _Gosamp_. Truly do thou relate unto me thy name, _Gotra_
and lineage. O thou twice-born one, why dost thou range alone in this
forest of Dandaka?" Sitā the wife of Rāma speaking thus, the mighty Lord
of Rākshasas—Rāvana replied with these harsh words—"0 Sitā I am that
Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas, whom fear the celestials, Asuras and
human beings. O thou of blamless beauty, seeing thee of golden hue and
wearing silk cloth I do not relish my own wives. I have brought many a
beautiful damsel from various quarters, do thou become my foremost Queen
amongst them. That great city in the midst of the ocean, Lankā,
encircled on all sides by the sea and situated on the summit of a hill,
is my capital. There shalt thou with me, Sitā, walk in gardens, and thus
thou shall no more long for living in the forest. If thou dost become my
wife, O Sitā, five thousand maid-servants decorated with divers
ornaments shall serve thee." That blameless daughter of Janaka, being
thus addressed by Rāvana, was highly enraged, and, passing by him,
replied, "I am a dependant ot Rāma, who is incapable of being shaken,
like unto a mighty mountain, incapable of being agitated, like unto a
vast ocean, and resembling Mahendra in effulgence. I am a dependant of
that great and truthful Rāma who is gifted with auspicious marks and
like unto a fig tree. I am dependant of that lion among men, Rāma, of
mighty arms, of a spacious breast and treading like a lion, I am a
dependant of that son of a king, Rāma, of mighty arms, having control
over his passions, whose face resembles the full moon and whose fame
hath spread far and wide over the earth. Why dost thou being a tiger
wish for a she-lion? Thou shalt not be able to touch me like unto the
rays of the sun. O thou wretched Rākshasa, when thou hast desired to
steal away Rāghava’s beloved spouse, surely dost thou see these trees
(before thee) as made of gold. Dost thou wish to uproot the teeth from
the mouth of a lion, that enemy of deer, or from that of a serpent? Dost
thou wish to clasp with thy hands the Mandara hill, or dost thou wish to
walk in peace after drinking poison? Dost thou wish to rub thy eyes with
pins and lick a razor with thy tongue? Thou dost wish to swim across an
ocean, having a rock tied unto thy neck. Thou dost wish to get at the
Sun and Moon, to bind a flaming fire with a piece of cloth and walk
through iron-spikes, as thou hast wished to come by the worthy spouse of
Rāma. Mighty is the difference between Rāma and thee, like unto that
between a lion and a jackal, a sea and a rivulet, nectar and gruel, gold
and iron, sandal and mud, an elephant and a cat, a crow and Garuda, a
peacock and a _madgie_ (an acquatic bird), or a duck and a vulture. Even
if thou dost steal me, that mighty archer Rāma, gifted with the prowess
of the lord of celestials, living, surely shall I die, like unto a gnat
sucking clarified butter." Addressing those words unto that wicked
ranger of the night, that innocent (Sitā) shook like a plantain tree
shaken by the wind. Thereupon Rāvana, like unto Death in prowess,
trembling, began to relate unto her with a view to frighten (her) his
race, power, name and actions.




## SECTION XLVIII.


After Sitā had spoken these harsh words, Rāvana, enraged, with a frown,
replied "O thou of a beautiful countenance, I am the step-brother of the
Lord of wealth and my name is the mighty Ten-necked Rāvana. May good
betide thee! Like unto people fearing Death, the celestials, Gandharbas,
Piçāchas, Pannagas and Serpents fly in diverse directions being
frightened by me. I have subdued by my prowess, my step-brother, the
Lord of wealth in a conflict, quarrelling with him for some reason.
Thereat, that one carried by men, renouncing out of my fear this wealthy
abode of Lānka, hath been living on that Lord of mountains, Kailaça. O
thou auspicious one, by virtue of my prowess I have taken away that
beautiful chariot of his called Puspaka. Ascending that chariot thou
shalt travel by the etherial route. O Maithilee, when I am excited with
ire, Indra and other celestials at the mere sight of my countenance fly
away in divers directions out of fear. Wherever I live, the Wind bloweth
cautiously and the Sun (of piercing rays) out of fear for me appeareth
in the welkin like the Moon. What shall I say more? Wherever I live,
even the leaves of the trees do not flutter and the currents of the
rivers are stopped. Beyond the ocean stands my beautiful capital Lankā
like unto Indra’s Amarāvati, (the capital of the Lord of celestials),
guarded on all sides by the terrible night-rangers and encircled by
yellow walls. That beautiful city hath gate-ways of ornamented and
jewelled arches and golden apartments. It is filled with elephants,
horses and chariots, always resounds with the sounds of bugles, and is
beautified with gardens having divers trees of wished for fruits. O
Sitā, O thou the daughter of a king, in this city shalt thou dwell with
me. O large-minded damsel, thou shalt never think of earthly women. O
thou of an exquisite countenance, enjoying these many things passing
human, thou shalt not any more think of Rāma—a human being of brief
existence. Placing his beloved son on the throne, king Daçaratha hath
sent away his eldest son of weak prowess into the woods. O thou of
expansive eyes, what shalt thou do with that wretched ascetic Rāma who
hath been deprived of his kingdom? I am the lord of the whole world of
Rākshasas; being pierced by the shafts of Kama have I come by thee. It
doth not behove thee therefore to pass by me. O timid damsel, truly
shalt thou repent afterwards if thou dost disregard me, like unto
Uruashee kicking Purarava. Rāma is a human being and is not even equal
to a finger of mine in battle. By thy good luck have I come unto thee—
do thou give thyself up unto me, O thou of a beautiful countenance."
Being thus addressed by him, Vaidehi exceedingly wroth and with
blood-red eyes spoke unto that Lord of Rākshasas in the lonely forest,
these bold words. "How dost thou wish to perpetrate such an impious deed
after introducing as thy brother that highly worshipful Kuvera adored by
all the deities. O Rāvana, surely shall all the Rākshasas meet with
death, who have such a stupid, harsh and lustful person like thee for
their king. One can breathe on this earth carrying away Indra’s wife,
Sachi—but stealing me, the wife of Rāma, no body shall be able to live
in peace. O Rākshasa, it might be possible for one to live on this earth
treating contemptuously the wife of the holder of thunder-bolt, but
insulting me none shall escape the hands of Death even if he drinketh
nectar.




## SECTION XLIX.


Hearing those words of Sitā the highly powerful Ten-necked one striking
his hands together, increased his body too high. Thereupon, that one
skilled in speech again spake unto Maithilee, "Methinks thou hast run
mad. Hast thou not heard of my valour and prowess? Stationing myself in
the welkin I can with my hands raise up the earth. I can drink up the
waters of the ocean. And engaged in conflict I can destroy Death itself.
With my sharpened shafts I can pierce the Sun and cut asunder the earth.
Thou art mad with thy beauty. Do thou look upon me, who am capable of
illusions." When he had spoken thus, his yellow eyes became blood-red
with rage and assumed the semblance of flaming fire. Thereat Rāvana, the
younger brother of the Lord of wealth, changing his placid countenance,
instantly assumed his own terrible shape resembling that of Yama. Highly
exercised with ire, that ranger of the night became of ten countenances
and twenty arms; his eyes were bloody and he appeared beautiful like
unto blue clouds, being dressed in gold-hued apparel. Leaving aside the
semblance of a mendicant, that lord of Rākshasas, Rāvana, increasing in
bulk, assumed his own shape. And wearing a blood-red cloth he stood
there fixing his look upon that jewel of a damsel—Maithili. Thereupon
Rāvana spake unto Maithili like unto the rays of the sun, having a head
of black hair and wearing apparel and ornaments, saying, "O thou fine
damsel, if thou dost wish to have a husband known all over the world, do
thou surrender thyself unto me. I am a worthy husband (or thee. Do thou
serve me for ever, thy praiseworthy husband. O fine lady, I shall never
do what thou dost not like. Renouncing thy attachment for a man, do thou
place thy love in me. O foolish girl, worthy of being adored by the
learned, for what quality art thou attached unto Rāma of a limited life,
who hath been deprived of his kingdom and hath his desire frustrated,
and who of an evil intent, hath, at the words of his wife, renouncing
his kingdom and kinsmen, been living in this forest—the abode of
voracious animals." Speaking thus unto Maithili, sweet-speeched and
worthy of being sweetly addressed, that highly wicked Rākshasa, Rāvana,
being exercised with lust, approached towards Sitā and got hold of her,
like unto Budha holding Rohini in the sky. With his left hand he held
her, having eyes like unto lotus-petals, by the hair, and with his right
hand got hold of her thighs. Seeing Rāvana of sharpened teeth, and
mighty arms, resembling the summit of a mountain and like unto death
itself, the deties of the forest became highly terrified and fled in
different directions. Instantly appeared there the celestial car of
Rāvana, decked in gold, drawn by asses and making a terrible sound.
Thereupon, that one emmiting terrible accents, remonstrated with Vaidehi
in harsh words and clasping her ascended the car. The virtuous Sitā,
being thus caught by Rāvana,began to cry aloud, addressing Rāma, who had
gone away to a distant forest. Rāvana, racked with lust, rose high up
with her like unto the wife of a _Pannaga_, though she tried her best
(to get rid of him), for she was not in the least attached unto him.
Being thus carried away by the ethereal track by that Lord of Rākshasas,
Sitā began to cry aloud, like one mad, distressed and of deranged
senses. "Ah! mighty Lakshmana, ever ministering unto the satisfaction of
thy superiors, dost thou not know that I have been stolen away by a
Rākshasa assuming shapes at will? O Rāghava, for virtue hast thou
renounced thy life, happiness and wealth,—dost thou not see that I have
been carried away by one of mighty iniquity? O thou the subduer of
foes,thou dost always control the rebellious,—why dost thou not punish
such a vicious Rākshasa? The vicious do not instantaneously meet with
the fruits of their actions; as for corn to ripen requires the
assistance of time. For this iniquitous deed, which thou hast
perpetrated, availing of the time and losing thy sense, thou shalt meet
with a mighty disaster from Rāma, bringing about thy end. Ah! being the
virtuous wife of the virtuous and far-famed Rāma, I have been stolen
away. Now hath the desire of Kaikeyi and other relations been fulfilled.
I invoke this Janasthāna and these flowery Karnikās to tell Rāma that
Rāvana hath stolen away Sitā. I invoke thee, O Godavari, having swans
and cranes sporting in thy stream, to tell Rāma that Rāvana hath stolen
away Sitā. I salute and invoke the deities that live in this forest of
many trees to tell my husband of my being stolen away (by Rāvana). I do
seek the refuge of all deer, birds and other animals that live in this
forest, and may they all communicate unto Rāma the news of his dear
spouse being carried away, and tell him that Sitā, losing her control,
hath been stolen away by Rāvana. Even if I am taken away by Yama, and if
the mighty-armed Rāma is apprised of it, surely shall he bring me back
by the display of his prowess." Racked with sorrow that one of expansive
eyes, while thus bewailing in piteous accents, she espied Yatāyu, the
king of vultures, seated on a tree. Thereat the daughter of Janaka,
brought under the control of Rāvana and terrified, began to cry and
utter those piteous words—"O worshipful Yatāyu, do thou see that this
vicious lord of Rākshasas hath ruthlessly carried me away like one
having no husband. Thou wilt not be able to withstand this mighty,
wicked and cruel night-ranger wearing emblems of conquest and having a
scimitar in his hand. Do thou relate unto Rāma and to Lakshmana
everything about my being carried away from the beginning to the end.




## SECTION L.


Hearing these words Yatāyu, who lay buried in a deep slumber, awoke and
beheld both Rāvana and Jānaki. Thereat the lord of birds resting on the
tree, having a big sharp beak like unto the summit of a hill, addressed
these soft words unto Rāvana, "O brother Ten-necked one, I am conversant
with Purānas, of truthful vows and abide by religion. It doth not behove
thee to perpetrate such an iniquitous deed before me. I am Yātayu, the
mighty lord of vultures. Daçaratha’s son Rāma is the lord of all men
like unto Mahendra and Varuna. He is ever engaged in the welfare of all
men. This exquisitely beautiful and far-famed Sitā whom thou art about
to steal away, is the married wife of that lord of men. And how dost
thou thyself being a monarch and engaged in the royal office of
maintaining subjects, carry away by stealth another’s wife? O thou of
mighty prowess, thou shouldst specially protect the wives of kings. Do
thou therefore control thy base inclination of oppressing another’s
wife. A hero doth never perform what bringeth calumny upon himself. It
becometh every individual to save another’s wife from the touch of a
second man like unto his own wife. O son of Paulastya, at the instance
of the king mild subjects perform many an action conducing to virtue,
wealth and desire, though not mentioned in the _Sastras_. The king is
the virtue, the king is the desire and the king is the prime jewel of
all subjects. Virtue, desire or sin—every thing ariseth from the king. O
thou the best of Rākshasas, thou art vicious and unsteady; how hast thou
come by rkhes like unto a sinner attaining to the abode of celestials? A
vicious person can never relinquish his sinful habits—virtue doth never
reside in the abodes of impious persons.

The mighty and the virtuous-souled Rāma hath committed nothing wrong in
thy city or thy dominions. Why dost thou then commit wrong by him? Khara
of Janasthāna is highly wicked and if Rāma of blameless actions hath
killed him on Surpanakhā’s account how is he to blame? Why dost thou
then carry away the wife of that lord of men? Do thou soon leave off
Vaidehi. Like unto Indra burning down Vitrasura, Rāma, looking with his
terrible eyes like flaming fire, shall reduce thee to ashes. Dost thou
not understand that thou hast tied with cloth a virulent serpent? Dost
thou not see that thou hast placed around thy neck the noose of death?
It is always proper to carry such a weight as doth not exhaust (him who
carries); it is always proper to take such a food as doth not cause
illness. Who engageth himself in such an action as doth not confer
virtue, fame or glory, but bringeth about physical affliction only? O
Rāvana, I am sixty thousand years old and have been administering
regularly my ancestral kingdom. Old though I am, thou shalt not be able
to carry away with safety Jānaki in my presence, young, accoutered in
mails as thou art with bow and arrows in thy hands and ascending a car.
As it is not easy to destroy, by the reasonings of Logic, Vedas and
Sruties containing eternal and immutable truths, so thou shalt not be
able to carry away Vaidehi by force before me. If thou art a hero do
thou fight. Or do thou wait for a moment, O Rāvana, thou shalt also
embrace the earth like unto Khara. Soon shall Rāma clad in bark destroy
thee in the battle field, who hadst many a time and oft destroyed in
conflict the celestials and Dānavas. These two princes Rāma and
Lakshmana are at a distance, what shall I do now? O vile being,
undoubtedly shalt thou, terrified, be destroyed by them. Myself drawing
my breath thou shalt not be able to carry away this beloved queen of
Rāma, the pure-natured Sitā having eyes resembling lotuses. It is my
duty to do good unto the high-souled Rāma and Daçaratha even at the
sacrifice of my life. Do thou stand, O Ten-necked one. Behold for a
moment. O Rāvana, I shall throw thee headlong from this car, like unto a
fruit from its stalk. O ranger of the night, even to my utmost might I
will render thee hospitality in encounter.




## SECTION LI.


While Yatāyu, the king of birds, spake this, Rāvana, the lord of
Rākshasas, wearing pendants made of pure gold, having his eyes reddened
with ire, darted towards him. Thereupon they began a terrible conflict
in the welkin, like unto clouds driven by wind. There occured a mighty
conflict between Yatāyu, the lord of vultures, and Rāvana, the lord of
Rākshasas, like unto two _Malyavān_⁵⁷ hills supplied with wings. Thereat
Rāvana began to shower continually terrible and sharpened pikes, iron
arrows and _Vikarnis_ upon the mighty lord of vultures. Yatāyu, the king
of birds, began to withstand in conflict the arrows and weapons darted
by Rāvana, and wounded Rāvana’s person with his feet supplied with
sharpened talons. Thereupon, to destroy his enemy, that mighty hero, the
Ten-necked Rāvana, being exercised with ire, took up ten terrible arrows
like unto the sceptre of Death, and stretching the bow to the full he
shot those straight-coursing sharpened shafts at Yatāyu, the king of
birds. Beholding Jānaki with tears In her eyes in that Rākshasa’s car,
Yatāyu, the king of birds, disregarding those arrows, darted towards
Rāvana, and with his feet broke asunder his bow with the arrows, adorned
with pearls and diamonds. Thereat Rāvana, almost beside himself with
wrath, taking up another bow, began to shower arrows by hundreds and
thousands. Being covered with those arrows, the lord of birds appeared
like a bird lying in his nest. Pushing away these arrows by the wind of
his wings, he again snapped that mighty bow with his feet, and with a
stroke of his wings shattered Rāvana’s flaming shield like unto burning
fire. Thereupon, moving away with the wind of his wings Rāvana’s blazing
cuirass resembling flaming fire, Jatāyu in that conflict made away with
his fleet-coursing asses having the faces of demons. Next crumbling into
pieces with his impetus the mighty chariot of Rāvana, coursing at will,
flaming like fire, having steps studded with jewels, and a wooden pole,
and throwing down the umbrella and _chowris_ like unto the full moon
along with the Rākshasas engaged in carrying them,the effulgent and
mighty lord of birds shattered the head of the charioteer with the
strokes of his beak. Having his bow snapped and deprived of his car,
horses and charioteer, Rāvana fell down to the earth, taking Vaidehi on
his lap. Beholding Rāvana fallen on the ground and of broken conveyance,
all creatures praised the king of vultures again and again and
worshipped him.

Thereupon, finding the lord of birds worn out on account of his old age,
Rāvana, highly encouraged, again rose high up in the welkin, taking
Maithili with him. He had all his weapons broken in the conflict, and
had but his dagger left to him. Beholding him proceed thus pleased,
taking the daughter of Janaka on his lap,—all his weapons having been
lost, with his sword alone left,—the mighty and powerful lord of
vultures, Yatāyu, rose up and, darting towards Rāvana, resisted him and
said,—"O Rāvana of feeble sense, it is for the destruction of the whole
line of Rākshasas that thou carriest away this spouse of Rāma, having
arrows like unto thunderbolts. Like one thirsty drinking water, thou
dost address thyself to drinking poison along with thy friends,
courtiers, four-fold forces, servants and relatives. Foolish persons
unaware of the fruit of their actions, meet in a short time with their
own destruction,—so shalt thou very soon meet with thy own end. Thou
hast been bound up by the noose of Death; and, proceeding whither, shalt
thou save thyself, like unto fish eating up baits with hooks for their
own destruction? O Rāvana, it is beyond thy power to defeat the
Kākutsthas. They shall not forgive thee for this thy encroachment upon
their asylum. What hath been perpetrated by thee, coward, is blamed by
all, and is the way taken recourse to by thieves and not by heroes. Do
thou fight, O Rāvana, if thou art a hero, or wait for a moment and thou
shalt lie down on the earth like unto thy brother Khara. Truly hast thou
for thy own destruction engaged thyself in these impious acts, which are
perpetrated by men on the eve of their death. What person doth that
which leadeth solely into sin? Neither the lord of celestials nor the
self-create Deity doth engage in such an action." Addressing these moral
words, the mighty Yatāyu swooped on the back of that Ten-necked
Rākshasa. Like unto the rider of a mad elephant, the lord of vultures
began to tear Rāvana with his sharpened claws, and that one having for
his weapons his beak, talons, and wings, began to rive Rāvana’s back
with his beak and claws, and to uproot his hair. Being thus aflicted
again and again by the king of vultures, the Rākshasa shook, with his
lips quivering in anger. Beside himself with anger, Rāvana, holding
Jānaki fast by her left flank, struck Yatāyu with his palms. Yatāyu, the
subduer of foes, bearing the strokes, tore into pieces his ten left arms
with his beak. His arms cut off, instantly sprang up as many others,
like unto serpents issuing out of ant-hills, being exercised with the
pangs of poison. The mighty Ten-necked one, leaving aside Sitā, out of
anger bore down Yatāyu with his fists and feet. Thereupon arose a mighty
conflict between the lord of of vultures and the lord of Rākshasas of
incomparable prowess. Yatāyu addressing himself to displaying his
prowess for the benefit of Rāma, Rāvana taking out his dagger, cut off
his two wings, two legs and two sides. The ranger of the night of cruel
deeds having sundered his wings, the king of vultures approaching
wellnigh the verge of death, fell down on the earth. Beholding him
fallen on the grand with his person bathed in blood, Sitā. became
exceedingly aggrieved and darted towards him like unto a friend. The
lord of Lankā beheld Yatāyu, fallen on the ground, resembling sable
clouds, having a yellow breast and of exceeding prowess,—like unto an
extinguished forest-fire. Then Sitā the daughter of Janaka, having a
moon-like countenance began lamenting, clasping with her hands Yatāyu,
crushed and fallen on the ground by the vehemence of Rāvana’s prowess.

   ⁵⁷ A mountainous range described as one of the smaller mountains of
      India proper, lying eastward of mount _Meru_.—T.




## SECTION LII.


Beholding the king of vultures slain by Rāvana, that one possessed of a
face fair as the moon, striken with grief, broke out into lamentations,
saying, "Throbbings of the eyes or other parts of the body, dreams,
seeing birds or hearing their voices, are found to augur happiness or
misery to men. And, O Rāma, although birds and beasts are scampering
away before thee on my account, thou understandest not the mighty mishap
that has befallen thee. O Rāma, this bird, who, moved by kindness, had
come to rescue me, owing to my (ill) luck, lies slain on the ground. O
Kākutstha, O Lakshmana, save me!" Thus did that best of females,
afflicted with fear, bewail; and those near (her) heard her
lamentations. Thereat, that lord of the Rākshasas, Rāvana, darted
towards Vadehi, who, with a faded wreath for her ornament, was bewailing
in forlorn guise. Exclaiming repeatedly, "Leave off!" "Leave off," the
lord of the Rākshasas got at her, as she was clasping a mighty tree as
if it were a creeper. And as she, bereft of the company of Rāma in the
wilderness, was wailing, saying, "O Rāma," "O Rāma," that one resembling
the Destroyer himself, with the view of compassing his own end, seized
her by her hair. On Vaidehi being thus outraged, this entire world
consisting of mobile and immobile objects, had its nature altered. A
dense darkness enveloped (everything). And the air did not breathe
there; and the sun grew dim. Espying with his divine vision that Sitā
was overcome, that Deity, the graceful Great-father exclaimed, "Our work
is accomplished." And seeing Sitā overpowered, the supreme saints
inhabiting the Dandaka forest, concluding the destruction of Rāvana to
be as good as accomplished without much ado, became at once delighted
and aggrieved. As she went on weeping with "O Rāma," "O Lakshmana,"
Rāvana—lord of Rākshasas —taking her, coursed through the sky. And then
the king’s daughter hued like molten gold, clad in a yellow silken
cloth, looked exceedingly beautiful like unto lightning. And on her
yellow cloth streaming up, Rāvana looked surpassingly graceful like a
hill aflame with fire. And coppery fragrant lotus-leaves belonging to
the eminently auspicious Vaidehi showered upon Rāvana. And her
gold-glowing silken cloth, flying in the air, appeared like clouds
colored by the sunken sun. And her blameless countenance on Rāvana’s lap
in the sky did not appear beauteous without Rāma,—like a lotus without
its stalk; it appeared like the moon risen tearing away dark clouds. And
in the aerial regions her countenance on Rāvana’s lap furnished with a
fair forehead and graceful hair glowing like the interior of a lotus,
without scars, graced with white, shining, stainless teeth, having
excellent eyes,—lovely like the moon, having a shapely nose, a rubeous
upper lip,—wearing the splendour of gold in the sky,—that captivating
countenance of hers in consequence of her weeping, and of being stained
with tears, as also owing to the violence it had undergone at the hands
of the lord of Rākshasas—did not appear beautiful without Rāma; like the
moon risen during the day. And furnished with the hue of gold, Mithilā’s
daughter beside the dark-bodied lord of the Rākshasas, looked like a
golden girth round a sable elephant. And Janaka’s daughter, yellow-hued
like lotus, having the lustre of gold.—and adorned with shining
ornaments, coming in contact with Rāvana, appeared like lightning
embosomed among clouds. And in consequence of Vaidehi’s ornaments
sending sounds, the lord of Rākshasas resembled an entirely dark
rumbling cloud. And as Sitā was being borne away, showers of blossoms,
falling off from her head, were scattered all around on the earth
beneath. And that blossomy shower all around, drawn up by the vehemence
of the ten-headed Rāvana, again alighted beside him. And the showers of
blossoms scattered around Vaiçravana’s younger brother, looked like rows
of burning stars round the foremost of mountains.⁵⁸ And the bangles
studded with gems, loosened from Vaidehi’s feet, fell on the earth, like
the lightning circle.⁵⁹ Of hue like the light red of tender twigs,
Vaidehi set off the dark-bodied lord of Rākshasas, as does a golden
cover an elephant. Vaiçravana’s younger brother carried away Sitā, who,
like a mighty meteor, filled the heavens with her splendour. And like
stars of exhausted religious merit dropping down from the sky, her fiery
ornaments began to fall to the earth with sounds. And the chain of the
splendour of the moon, removed from Vaidehi’s breast, falling down,
shone like the Gangā dropping from the sky. The trees filled with
various fowls, with their tops waving because of the wind blowing on
high and swaying them, seemed to say, "No fear," [unto Sitā.] And the
pools with their lotuses faded and their fishes agitated, seemed to
sorrow for the desponding daughter of Mithilā as for their friend. And
following Sitā’s shadow, lions, and tigers, and other beasts and birds,
rushed from all sides in wrath. And the mountains, with their faces
washed with water-falls representing tears, and their summits resembling
uplifted arms, seemed to lament for Sitā, as she was being carried away.
And beholding Vaidehi carried away, the glorious Sun, oppressed with
sadness, had his rays dimmed and his disc darkened. "Virtue is not; and
where is truth? And there is neither sincerity nor kindness,—in a case
in which Rāvana is carrying away Rāma’s Vaidehi thus did all creatures
lament in numbers. And the young of deer, afflicted with fear, wept with
woe-begone faces. And the sylvan deities, looking up now and again with
eyes betokening fear, had their persons all in a tremble. For compassing
his own destruction, the Ten-headed one carried away the intelligent
Vaidehi, bewailing bitterly, Sitā, who had come by such misfortune,
sweet-voiced, crying, "O Lakshmana" "O Rāma," and casting glances on the
ground many a time and oft,—the ends of her hair waving and her _tilika_
wiped out. Then oppressed with the load of fear, Sitā of luminous
smiles,—Mithilā’ s daughter, bereft of her friends —not beholding either
Rāma or Lakshmana, became pale of countenance.

   ⁵⁸ Sumeru.—T.

   ⁵⁹ Instead of _On the earth_—some texts have [bangles]
      _sweet-sounding_.—T.




## SECTION LIII.


Seeing him fly up into the air, Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, became
aggrieved and exceedingly agitated, and great was the fear that
possessed her. Her eyes expressing rage, weeping and fright, Sitā, as
she was being carried away, weeping piteously, spoke to the grim-eyed
lord of the Rākshasas, saying, "Dost thou not, O base wretch, Rāvana,
feel shame on account of this act—thou, who, knowing that I was alone,
fliest away, carrying me? Coward that thou art, thou it was, who,
desirous of carrying me off, by the shape of a deer, hadst, by thy
[powers of] illusion taken away my lord. And he also that endeavoured to
rescue me, has been slain by thee—the ancient king of vultures, who was
the friend of my father-in-law. Great, forsooth, is found to be thy
might, thou vilest of Rākshasas; in that thou hast carried me off by
simply declaring thy name, but hast not won me in war. Why dost thou
not, O execrable one, take shame unto thyself, having perpetrated such a
heinous act—having carried off another’s wife in the absence of her
husband? This fell and foul act of thine fraught with unrighteousness,
heroic persons shall bruit about the world. Fie on thy heroism and thy
truth,—of which thou didst apeak at that time; and fie also on this
character of thine, calculated to sully thy line in this world. What can
I do (unto thee), as thou proceedest with speed? But stay thou for a
moment; and thou shalt not return with life. Shouldst thou come within
the range of the vision of those sons of the king, thou couldst not,
although thou shouldst happen to be accompanied with thy army, live for
a moment. Even as a bird cannot bear the touch of a flaming fire in a
forest, thou canst never bear the touch of their arrows. Effecting thy
own welfare, do thou, O Rāvana, leave me. If thou do not let me go, my
husband along with his brother would strive for thy destruction. As
intent upon sensul enjoyment, thou endeavourest to ravish me, this very
endeavour of thine, O mean wight, shall come to naught. Not beholding my
lord resembling a celestial, I cannot, come under the sway of my enemy,
bear to live long. As one dwelling on earth perceives objects in their
reversed relations at the time of one’s death, so thou dost not perceive
what is for thy good or profit. Those moribund do not relish what would
do them good. I see thee with the noose of Death wound round thy neck.
As, O ranger of night, thou art not affected with fear, albeit the
situation is one calculated to raise one’s apprehensions, it is clear
that thou wilt see the golden trees, the dreadful river Vaitarani
flowing with blood, the terrible wood, O Rāvana, rife with leaves in the
shape of swords, and a sharp Sālmali containing blossoms of shining
gold, having lapises for its leaves, and bearing iron thorns. But, O
shameless one, like a person that hath drunk poison, having done this
wrong unto that high-souled one, thou wilt not be able to save thyself.
O Rāvana, thou art fast fettered in the noose of Death. Having done this
foul turn unto that high-souled one, repairing whither, shalt thou
obtain respite? Shall not that strong and heroic Rāghava, skilled in all
weapons, who without his brother, in the twinkling of an eye, in battle
slew fourteen thousand Rākshasas, slay thee, who carriest away his
beloved wife?" Thus and in other ways, Videha’s daughter, lying on the
lap of Rāvana, overwhelmed with fear and grief, indulged in piteous
lamentations. And the wicked (Rāvana) with a shaking frame carried away
the daughter of the king extremely distressed, speaking much, and
speaking piteously, uttering lamentations, and putting forth endeavours
(to free herself.)




## SECTION LIV.


Carried away (by Rāvana), Vaidehi, not finding any defender, saw five
principal monkeys stationed on the top of a hill. Thereat, that lady of
expansive eyes and surpassing charms, in the hope that they might convey
the intelligence unto Rāma, flung off in their midst her gold-gleaming
silken sheet, and elegant ornaments. But the Ten headed one owing to
hurry did not observe the throwing of the cloth along with the
ornaments. Those foremost of monkeys having tawny eyes observed with
winkless eyes the large-eyed Sitā as she was giving way to grief. And
the lord of Rākshasas, passing beyond Pampā, directed his course towards
the city of Lankā, taking Mithilā’s daughter along with him, indulging
in lamentations. Experiencing the height of delight, Rāvana ravished
her, taking her on his lap, like a sharp-toothed serpent of virulent
poison. And speedily, like an arrow shot from a bow, he, coursing the
welkin, left behind woods and streams and mountains and pieces of water.
And coming to the abode of Varuna, that refuge of rivers, the
exhaustless ocean—the home of whales and alligators, he crossed over it.
In consequence of the carrying away of Vaidehi, Varuna’s abode, from
grief, had all its waves stilled and its fishes and mighty snakes
inert.—And the Chāranas uttered in the heavens these words, "O
Ten-headed one, this is thy end." Thus did the Siddhas then say. And
taking Siti on his lap, representing his own Death,—who endeavoured (to
liberate herself), Rāvana entered the city of Lankā. And entering the
city of Lankā, vast, with all its highways well-arranged, and with
people thronging its gates, he entered his own inner apartment. Then
Rāvana set Sitā there, having eyes with dark outer corners, exercised
with grief and dole; as if Maya had set his own Asura Illusion (in his
own palace). Then the Ten-headed one spoke unto some female friends of
terrible visages, "Let no man or woman behold Sitā without my
permission. And I command that, should she ask for pearls, or rubies, or
gold, or apparel, or ornaments, the same should be rendered unto her.
She that, whether knowingly or unknowingly should say anything
unpleasant to Vaidehi, would hold her life cheap." Having said this unto
the Rākshasis, the puissant lord of the Rāksahsas, went out of the inner
apartment, and thought within himself as to what was to be done (next).
And he saw eight flesh-eating Rākshasas of wondrous prowess. And seeing
them, the exceedingly powerful (Rāvana), blinded by the bestowal of the
boon, after extolling their strength and heroism, addressed them,
saying, "Equipped with various weapons, do ye speedily take yourself to
Janasthāna,— that field of carnage—which ere this contained the abode of
Khara; and casting off fear at a distance, do ye sojourn in vacant
Janasthāna with all its Rākshasas slain (by Rāma). A great many troops
endeued with exceeding prowess, who had been posted in Janasthāna, have,
along with Dushana and Khara, been slain by the shafts of Rāma. Hence
unprecedented is my wrath, towering above my patience; and great and
fierce also is the hostility I have conceived against Rāma. I wish to
avenge myself on my mighty enemy. Sleep find I none without slaying my
foe in fight. Slaying that slayer of Khara and Dushana, Rāma, I shall
attain delight like unto that attained by a pauper on gaining riches.
Staying in Janasthāna, ye shall gather true information touching Rāma as
to what he is about. Repair all ye rangers of the night carefully, and
strive yourselves always for slaying Rāma. I have been well acquainted
with your strength in many a field, and it is for this that I set ye in
Janasthāna." Hearing these agreeable and weighty words of Rāvana, those
Rākshasas, bowing down unto Rāvana, left Lankā, and in a body invisibly
proceeded in the direction of Janasthāna. Having obtained Mithilā’s
daughter, Rāvana experienced great joy in establishing her (in his own
house); and having created high hostility with Rāma, Rāvana through
blindness rejoiced greatly.




## SECTION LV.


Having commissioned those eight terrible and mighty Rākshasas, Rāvana,
in consequence of perversion of sense, considered himself as crowned
with success. And brooding over Vaidehi, he, sore pierced by the shafts
of Kāma, hastily entered his charming mansion, with the intention of
seeing Sitā. And entering that apartment, Rāvana—lord of Rākshasas—saw
the distressed Sitā in the midst of the Rākshasas, with a tearful
countenance, oppressed with a load of grief, like unto a bark sinking in
the ocean through the violence of the winds; like unto a doe separated
from the herd of deer, and surrounded by dogs. Coming to Sitā
disconsolate in consequence of stress of sorrow, remaining with her head
bent down, that ranger of the night, the lord of the Rākshasas, forcibly
shewed unto her that mansion resembling the mansion of the celestials,
thick with palaces and lordly piles, inhabited by thousands of females;
containing birds of vaious kinds; furnished with various gems; with
beautiful pillars of ivory gold and crystal and silver, studded with
diamonds and lapises. Rāvana in company with Sitā ascended the beautiful
golden stairs, resounding with the sounds of kettle-drums and
embellished with ornaments of burnished gold. And those loftly edifices
had excellent windows made of ivory and silver, and covered with golden
nets. The ground all over was decorated with ambrosia and gems. The
Ten-headed one in his own mansion shewed unto Maithilee large tanks and
pools covered with various kinds of flowers. (All this) Rāvana shewed
unto Sitā overmastered by sorrow. And after having shewed unto Vaidehi
the whole of that goodliest of mansions, that wicked one, with the
intention of tempting Sitā, spoke unto her, saying, "O Sitā, leaving out
old men and boys, I am the lord of thirty two _kotis_ of night-rangers
of terrible deeds. And a thousand come forward whenever required for any
service.—If such is my sovereignty, all this is established in thee, O
large-eyed lady, as well as my life. Thou art dearer unto me than life.
O Sitā, be thou the mistress of those numerous excellent women who are
my wives. Dear, be thou my wife. This is for thy good. Why shoudst thou
act otherwise? Do thou relish my speech. Do thou bend thy mind towards
me. It behoves thee to favor me, who am burning (in the heat of desire).
This Lankā measuring an hundred Yoyanas girt round by the ocean, is
incapable of being harassed by the celestials themselves headed by
Indra. Neither among the celestials nor Yakshas nor Gandharbas nor
Serpents, find I any one that can match me in prowess. What wilt thou do
with Rāma a human being of short life, poor, of small prowess,
practising mendicancy? O Sitā, bend thy mind unto me. I am a fit husband
for thee. O timed one, youth is uncertain. Sport with me here. And, O
thou of a handsome countenance, do not wish for the sight of Rāghava. O
Sitā, what power hath he to come hither even in thought? None can fetter
the exceedingly fleet wind in the sky, or hold the bright flame of a
burning fire. O beauteous one, in these three worlds I find no one that
can by his might carry thee away, who art protected by my arms. Do thou
govern at Lankā this extensive kingdom. The like of me and celestials
and all that are mobile and immobile shall be thy servants. Laving thy
limbs with water, do thou gratify me. The evil that thou hadst done,
hath been expiated by thy life in the forest: now do thou reap the fruit
of thy good deeds. Here are garlands furnished with divine fragrance,
and, O Maithili, superb ornaments. Enjoy thou all those along with me. O
thou of shapely hips, the car called Pushpaka, resembling the sun, which
(formerly) belonged to my brother Vaiçravana, was through my prowess won
by me in fight. And vast and beautiful is that car furnished with the
speed of the mind. Do thou, O Sitā, at thy pleasure sport on it along
with me. Thy face stainless and lovely to look at, resembling the lotus,
doth not, O thou of a comely countenance, O magnificent damsel, appear
beautiful in consequence of thy being exercised with grief. When Rāvana
had spoken thus, that best of females Sitā muffling up her moon-like
countenance with the ends of her cloth, began to shed gentle tears.
Thereat the heroic ranger of the night, Rāvana, said unto Sitā,
distressed, sunk in thought, and deprived of her splendour through
anxiety, "O Vaidehi, banish bashfulness, which stands in the way of
one’s duty. The yearning I feel after thee is in consonance with what
the sages prescribe. These tender feet of thine I press upon my heads.
Do thou speedily shew thy favor unto me. I am thy slave (ever) obedient
unto thee. Let not these words of mine spoken by me under the withering
influence of love prove fruitless. Rāvana hath never bowed his head to
any female." Having said this, the Ten-headed one, come under the
subjection of the Destroyer, looked upon Maithili, Janaka’s daughter (as
his own) saying, "She is mine."




## SECTION LVI.


Having been thus addressed, Vaidehi unaffected by fear, although
exercised with grief, placing a blade of grass between herself and
Rāvana, answered him, saying, "There was a king named Daçaratha, the
bridge of righteousness, like unto a mountain, ever bearing regard
towards the truth, and renowned among men, whose son is Rāghava. He is
named Rāma, and is righteous-souled and celebrated over the three
worlds. He is long-armed, of expansive eyes,—like unto a celestial—he is
my husband. Born in the race of the Ikshwākus, he hath the shoulders of
a lion and is possessed of exceeding effulgence—the same that along with
his brother, Lakshmana, shall take thy life. If thou hadst wronged me
forcibly in his presence, thou wouldst have lain in battle in Janasthāna
even as Khara." All the mighty Rākshasas of grim visages, whom thou hast
extolled (before me) shall be deprived of their venom before Rāma, as
serpents are before Suparna. The shafts decorated with gold shot by the
bow-string of Rāghava, shall pierce their bodies, as the waves of the
Ganga (beat against) her banks, Although, O Rāvana, thou mayst be
incapable of being slain either by the gods or the Asuras, yet having
roused the high hostility of Rāghava, thou wilt not be able to liberate
thy life. The strong Rāghava will compass the end of what remains of thy
life. Like the life of a beast tied to the sacrificial stake, thy own is
incapable of being reclaimed, Should Rāma look at thee with eyes aglow
with anger, thou, O Rākshasa, wouldst be consumed even as Manmatha was
by Rudra. He who is able to bring down the Moon or destroy him, and to
drink up the ocean dry, will surely liberate Sitā from here. Thy days
are numbered, and auspiciousness hath bidden thee adieu. Thou art shorn
of strength, and thy senses have been dulled. And it is owing to thee
that Lankā shall be subject to widowhood. That thou by force hast for
naught carried me away from the side of my husband —this sinful act can
never conduce to thy felicity. That exceedingly effulgent lord of mine
along with my husband’s younger brother, summoning up their energy, is
fearlessly dwelling in the vacant Dandaka. By means of an arrowy shower
in conflict, he will take thy prowess and strength, thy hauteur and
wickedness out of thy person. When urged by the Destroyer, the
destruction of creatures is perceptible, then, coming under the sway of
the Destroyer, men become careless in their actions. Having outraged me,
thou, O worst of Rākshasas, thy time come; for compassing thy own
destruction as well as that of the Rākshasas and those dwelling in thy
inner apartment. A Chandāla cannot tread the dais reared in the midst of
a sacrifice beauteous with ladles, and vessels, and sanctified by the
twice-born ones. So I, the religiously wedded wife of that one, ever
intent on virtue, and (always) firm in my vows, is incapable, thou
vilest of Rākshasas, of being touched by thee, a sinner. How can the
female that hath always sported with her mate amidst lotuses, cast her
eyes on a shag staying among rushes. Do thou either bind or destroy this
body deprived of sensation. This body will I not protect, nor yet this
life, O Rāvana; and I shall not be able to bring blame on myself in this
world." Having said these harsh words in wrath, Videha’s daughter,
Jānaki, did not there again say anything unto Rāvana. Hearing Sitā’s
words, harsh and calculated to make one’s down stand on end, Rāvana
answered her in words tending to excite one’s apprehension, "Hear, O
Maithili, my words. O damsel if, O thou of sweet smiles, within this
time thou do not turn thyself unto me, the cooks shall cut thee off in
pieces to serve my morning meal." Having herself spoken thus,
Rāvana,—challenger of foes— growing exceedingly wroth, addressed the
Rākshasis in these words, "Ye frightful Rākshasis terrible to behold,
subsisting on flesh and gore, do ye at once crush her pride." As soon as
he had said this, those frightfnl and terrible Rākshasis with joined
hands encircled Maithili. Then the grim-visaged king Rāvana, as if
riving the earth by his tread, proceeding a pace or two, said, "Do ye
take Maithili to the wood of _Asokas_. There surrounding her, do ye
secretly guard her; and there (sometimes) by storming, and (at others)
by means of soft speech, do ye all strive to bring Mithilā’s daughter,
like a wild female elephant, under your sway." Thus commanded by Rāvana,
those Rākshasis taking Maithili along with them, went to the _Asoka_
wood, abounding with trees granting every desire, and filled with
various kinds of fruits and flowers; and frequented by fowls fraught
with juices at all seasons. And as a doe comes under the subjection of
tigresses, Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, her frame worked up with grief,
came under the sway of the Rākshasis. And like a female deer fast bound
by a trap, Janaka’s timid daughter Maithili, agitated by the mighty
grief, did not attain respite. And greatly up-braided by the fierce eyes
(of the Rākshasis), Maithili did not know repose; and, afflicted with
grief and fear, she, remembering her beloved lord along with Lakshmana
swooned away.




## SECTION LVI.


Having slain the Rākshasa, Māricha, able to wear shapes at will, who had
been ranging in the form of a deer, Rāma speedily turned back along the
path. On Sitā having entered Lankā, the great father addressed the
gratified Devendra of an hundred sacrifices, "For bringing about the
weal of the three worlds, and the woe of the Rākshasas, Sitā hath been
taken into Lankā by the wicked-minded, Rāvana. Devoted unto her husband,
the exalted lady always brought up in happiness, not seeing her husband,
and seeing (on the other hand) environed by numbers of Rākshasis,—is
hungering after the sight of her lord. The city of Lankā is situated on
the shores of the lord of rivers and streams. How can Rāma get a
knowledge of that blameless one, staying there? Brooding over the
various ills she hath undergone, that exceedingly rare damsel is passing
her days. Surely she will resign her existence. Great is the doubt that
hath arisen as to Sitā putting a period to her existence. Having thyself
from here, do thou see the fair-faced Sitā. Having entered the city of
Lankā, offer excellent clarified butter." Thus addressed by the reverend
chastiser of Paka, Devendra in company with sleep, approached the city
ruled by Rāvana. He then addressed sleep, saying, "Go thou; and stupify
the Rākshasas." Thus accosted by Maghavat, that goddess, exceedingly
delighted, for securing success to the work of the celestials, covered
the Rākshasas with stupor. In the meanwhile, that god, the thousand-eyed
lord of Sachi went to (Sitā) staying in the woods, and spoke unto her
these words, "I am the sovereign of the celestials. Good betide thee! I
am here, O thou of luminous smiles! For securing success unto the work
of the magnanimous Rāghava, I will lend my aid unto thee. Do not, O
daughter of Janaka, grieve. Through my grace, he shall along with his
forces cross over the ocean. And, O excellent wench, I have by my
supernal power, stupified the Rākshasis. And, O Sitā, for this reason, I
along with sleep, taking these rice,—rice boiled in clarified butter,
have, O Vaidehi, come unto thee. If thou partake of these from my hand,
thou shalt never beuteous one, be afflicted either with hunger or
thirst, thou of thighs resembling _rambhā_ (trunks), for years." Thus
addressed, Sitā, alarmed, said, "How can I know thee for Devendra,
Sachi’s husband, staying here? By the side of Rāma and Lakshmana, I had
beheld the signs of the celestials. If, O Devendra, thou art thyself the
sovereign of the celestials, show those unto me." Hearing Sitā’s words,
the lord of Sachi did accordingly. He did not touch the earth with his
feet, and his eyes remained winkless. He bloomed in youth, and the
blossoms did not fade on his attire. Thereupon knowing him for Vasava,
Sitā was overjoyed. And weeping, she spoke regarding Rāghava, "By luck
it is that I had heard of that mighty-armed one along with his brother.
As is my father-in-law, the king, as is the master of Mithilā, so art
thou (unto me), thou whom I behold to-day; my husband hath now found a
protector.— And by thy command, O Devendra, will I partake of this
_pāyasa_ cooked with milk, which hath been offered unto me, and which
shall enhance (the prosperity) of our race." Thereupon taking the
_pāyasa_ from Indra’s hands, that Maithili of luminous smiles (mentally)
offered it unto her husband as well as Lakshmana. "If my mighty lord
live along with his brother, let this through my reverence for them, be
theirs." She then partook of the _pāyasa_ herself. Having thus eaten it,
that one of excellent countenance, had her hunger and rising sorrow
removed; and attaining a mental tendency from Indra, Jānaki grew glad
with reference to the Kākutshthas. And Sakra also for bringing about the
success of Rāghava’s work, with a pleased mind, went to the abode of
celestials. And greeting Sitā again and again, that high-souled
celestial, in company with sleep went back to his own abode."




## SECTION LVII.


Killing the Rākshasa, Māricha assuming shapes at will and ranging in the
shape of a deer, Rāma vended speedily his way. And as he hurried
himself, eager to behold Maithili, jackals began to howl hideously at
his back. Hearing their harsh cries, capable of making one’s hair stand
on end, Rāma struck with fear at the voices of the jackals, became
filled with alarm. "Ah! I consider this as inauspicious— that these
jackals are crying. Escaping being devoured by the Rākshasas, may fair
fortune befall Vaidehi! If Lakshmana should have heard the cries which
Māricha, knowing my voice, and fixing on the means of harming me,
uttered in the form of a deer, Saumitri, hearing that voice, leaving
Mithilā’s daughter and commissioned by herself, must have come near me.
Surely, the Rākshasas in a body are desirous of slaying Sitā. Becoming a
golden deer, Māricha, having allured me far, transformed himself into a
Rākshasa, as soon as he had been struck with my shafts; and exclaimed,
’Ah! Lakshmana, slain am I.’ It is doubtless, we having left (Sitā),
whether all is well with her. I having raised the hostility of the
Rākshasas for the sake of Janasthāna; and many and dreadful are the
omens I see (around me)." Thus reflecting as he heard the bowlings of
the jackals, the self-possessed Rāma with hasty steps returned to the
asylum. Rāghava went back to Janasthāna, alarmed in consequence of his
having been drawn away by the Rākshasa in the form of a deer. And birds
and beasts approached that high-souled one distressed and depressed in
spirit; and staying on his left set up frightful cries. As he was
witnessing the exceedingly dreadful signs, Rāghava saw Lakshmana coming
with a lacklustre (countenance); and Lakshmana came up to Rāma. And
depressed in spirit, he was rendered still more sad by that one who,
afflicted with depression shared his sorrow. And, seeing that
(Lakshmana) had come, leaving Sitā in that solitary wood frequented by
Rākshasas, his brother fell to reprimanding him. And taking Lakshmana’s
left; hand, the son of Raghu in extreme distress sweetly spake these
rough words, "Alas! Lakshmana, thou hast committed a censurable act;
leaving Sitā, O mild one, thou hast come hither. Is it well with her? I
make no doubt, O hero, but that Janaka’s daughter hath either been slain
or devoured by Rākshasas ranging the forest. And, considering the many
omens that take place before me, O Lakshmana, I do not know whether we
shall light upon welfare of Janaka’s daughter Sitā being alive, O best
of men. And as these multitudes of beasts and these jackals are crying
frightfully in the flaming direction,⁶⁰ I do not know, O thou of mighty
strength, whether it is well with that daughter of the king. This
Rākshasa, who, wearing the shape of a deer, and, alluring me, had drawn
me far, hath in some sort been slain by me with much ado; and he became
a Rākshasa at the time of his death. Yet my mind is poor and cheerless;
and my left eye throbs. Doubtless, O Lakshmana, Sitā is not,—she is
either carried away, or dead, or is wandering on the way.

   ⁶⁰ _i. e._ The quarter presided over by the sun, _viz._, the East.—T.




## SECTION LVIII.


Seeing Lakshmana cast down, cheerless, and come without Vaidehi, the
righteous son of Daçaratha, asked him, saying, "Where, O Lakshmana is
that Vaidehi, who hath followed me unto the Dandaka forest, and leaving
whom thou hast come hither? Where is that one of a slender waist, who is
the help in trouble of me, deprived of my kingdom, dispirited, and
running about the Dandakas? Without whom, hero, I cannot live for a
moment—where is that life’s help of me Sitā resembling the daughter of a
celestial? O Lakshmana, without Janaka’s daughter (hued) like burning
gold, I covet not the sovereignty of the celestials or the earth. Liveth
Vaidehi, dearer unto me than life? Shall this exile of mine be of no
avail? O Sumitra’s son, on my dying for Sitā and thy returning (to the
city,) shall Kaikeyi have her desire, and attain felicity; and shall
Kauçalyā,— her son dead, and herself wearing the guise of a female
mendicant, humbly wait upon Kaikeyi when she shall have succeeded in
obtaining the kingdom for her son? If Vaidehi live, I will then return
to the asylum; but O Lakshmana, if that one of excellent character
should happen to be dead, I will also renounce my life. If, O Lakshmana,
Vaidehi ever preluding her speech with a smile should not speak to me
when I arrive at the asylum, I shall give up my life. Do thou tell me, O
Lakshmana, whether Videha’s daughter liveth or not; or whether, in
consequence of thy acting heedlessly, that forlorn wench hath been
devoured by Rākshasas. Of a tender frame, and a mere girl, Vaidehi,
never having experienced unhappiness being cast down, surely weepeth for
my separation. When that exceedingly wicked Rākshasa cried, "Lakshmana"
at the top of his voice, wast thou also seized with fear? And I
apprehend that voice resembling mine was heard by Vaidehi; and,
despatched by her from fear, thou mayst have come hither swiftly to
see⁶¹ me. Thou hast every way acted unwisely in having left Sitā alone
in the wood. By this thou hast afforded opportunity to the cruel
Rākshasas to repair the mischief (I have done them). The Rākshasas
subsisting on flesh are aggrieved because of Khara having been slain;
and now, without doubt, those terrible ones have slain Sitā. Alas!
absolutely sunk am I in peril, O destroyer of foes. What shall I do now?
I fear such an event was appointed for me." Thus thinking of Sitā,
paragon among women, Rāghava hastily went to Janasthāna in company with
Lakshmana. Taking to task his younger brother of distressed visage,
Rāma, afflicted with hunger and thirst, and dejected in spirits, sighing
heavily with a countenance turned pale, entered the asylum and found it
vacant. And entering his own asylum, that hero went to the play-grounds
(of Sitā) and remembering the sporting ground (of Sitā) in that abode,
he was filled with grief and his down stood on end.

   ⁶¹ Some texts—_to rescue me.—T._




## SECTION LIX.


When coming out of the hermitage, Raghu’s descendant, Rāma, after a
while, from grief, spake these words to the son of Sumitrā, "When
confiding myself in thee, I had left Maithili with thee in the wood, why
then didst thou go oat, leaving her behind? O Lakshmana, directly I saw
thee approach, renouncing Maithili, my mind, apprehending great wrong,
became really aggrieved. O Lakshmana, seeing thee coming at a distance,
renouncing her, my left eye and arm as well as ray heart keep
throbbing." Thus accosted, Lakshmana having auspicious signs, afflicted
with great grief, said unto the aggrieved Rāma, "I have not come hither,
of my own accord, renouncing Sitā; but I have come to thee, having been
urged thereto by herself with rudeness. The cries of "O Lakshmana, save
me," as if uttered by the master, came to the ears of Maithili. Hearing
those distressful accents, Maithili from affection [for thee], breaking
out into lamentations, and overwhelmed with fear, spoke unto me, "Off,"
"off." On being repeatedly urged, with "Go," I answered Maithili in
these words, tending to inspire her confidence, ’I do not see such a
Rākshasa, as can excite his fear. Do thou desist. These cries do not
come from him; but must have been uttered by some one else. How can he
that can rescue the celestials themselves, utter, O Sitā, such a
blame-worthy and base word as—save [me]? Some one far some purpose,
assuming my brothers voice, is crying— O Lakshmana, save me. O beauteous
lady, these words, Save me—must have been uttered by some Rākshasa from
fear. Thou shouldst not act like a mean woman. Do not be overwhelmed;
and banish thy anxiety. There breathes no person, nor yet shall there be
born any one in these three worlds who in the field shall vanquish
Rāghava in fight. Rāghava is incapable of being beaten in battle by the
very gods headed by Indra.’ Thus addressed (by me) Vaidehi, deprived of
her sense, shedding tears, spake unto me these cruel words, ’Thou
cherishest the vile idea that on thy brother perishing, thou shalt come
by me; but me thou shalt never have. As thou dost not go to him albeit
he is crying loudly (for help), thou followest Rāma in consonance with a
hint from Bharata. A foe going about in disguise, thou followest Rāma
for my sake, prying into Rāghava’s draw backs; and it is for this that
thou dost not go (to him)?’ Thus accosted by Vaidehi, I, with eyes
reddened in wrath, and my nether lip swollen in ire, rushed out of "the
asylum." When Saumitri had spoken thus, Rāma transported by grief, said
unto Lakshmana, "O gentle one, thou hast done wrong in having come out
hither without her. Although thou knewest (full well) that I was able to
withstand the Rākshasas, yet didst thou sally out at the angry words of
Mithilā’s daughter. I am not pleased with thee that hearing her harsh
speech spoken in wrath, thou hast come hither, leaving Vaidehi behind.
Thou hast every way done wrong in not acting out my mandate in
consequence of being urged by Sitā, and under the influence of
indignation. That Rākshasa lieth low, being wounded by my shafts—that
had drawn me away from the asylum wearing the form of a deer. I hit him
stretching my brow slightly and fixing the shaft on it; when, renouncing
his deer-form he became a Rākshasa wearing a bracelet and began to emit
distressful shrieks. Wounded by my shaft, he, assuming my voice, and in
accents capable of being heard from far, uttered those dreadful words
fraught with dole, hearing which, thou hast come hither, renouncing
Mithilā’s daughter."




## SECTION LX.


As Rāma went on, his feet failed him, his left eye began to beat, and a
trembling came over his frame. Seeing again and again all these signs,
he continually kept on asking (Lakshmana), "Is it well with Sitā?" Eager
to behold Sitā, he proceeded fast; but finding the abode empty, he was
filled with anxiety. And proceeding with swiftness, throwing about his
limbs, Raghu’s son began to survey all around the hut. He then found it
empty of Sitā, like unto a tank in evil plight and bereft of
lotuses—during the winter. And seeing the cottage empty, with its trees
as if sorrowing, and its flowers faded, and its beasts and birds sunk in
gloom,— shorn of grace, worn out, forsaken by the sylvan deities, strewn
with deer-skins and Kuça, and twists of Kāsa, he wept again and
again—"Hath the timid one been carried off, or is she dead, or hath any
one eaten her up, or hath she vanished (from the earth), or hath she
gone to the wood, or hath she gone to cull flowers and fruits, or hath
she gone to the pool for procuring water, or hath she repaired to the
river? Although he searched his beloved one carefully, yet he failed to
find her out in the wood-land. And that graceful one with his eyes
reddened with grief, seemed like a maniac. And he rushed from tree to
tree, and bewailing being sunk in an occean of grief traversed all the
rivers and mountains. "O _Kadamba_, hast thou seen where is that one
fond of Kadamba groves? If knowest thou this do thou tell me of Sitā
having an auspicious countenance. O _Bilya_, tell me pray, if thou hast
seen her, wearing silken cloth, resembling cool leaves and having breast
like unto _Bilya_ fruits. Or, O Aryunā, she was very fond of thee, tell
me if liveth that daughter of Janaka of slender frame. This _Kakuva_
knoweth for certain about Maithilee having thighs like unto _Kakuva_.
Yon stands beautifully that _Banaspati_ being enveloped with creepers,
flowers and leaves and filled with the hum of _Vramaras_. Surely doth
this _Tilaka_ know about her who was fond of her. O _Asoka_, who doth
remove sorrows, do thou make good thy name by making me, who am
exercised with grief, see instantly my beloved (spouse). O _Tala_, if
thou hast any pity on me do thou tell me whether thou hast beheld that
fair damsel having breast resembling ripe _Tala_ fruits. Do thou tell me
without fear, O Jāmbhu, if thou hast seen my dear one resembling in hue
the river Jāmbhu. O _Karnikar_, thou appearest very beautiful with this
blossoming flowers, tell me if thou hast seen my dear devoted wife who
was fond of thee." Thus the highly famous Rāma asking about Sitā,
nearing the various trees such as mangoe, Nipa, Mahasālā, Panaça,
Kurava, Pomegranate, Vakula, Pumnaga, Sandal and Keta began to traverse
the forest like a maniac. Again addressed he the diverse animals—"O
deer, knowest thou for certain about Jānaki having the eyes of a doe; is
she engaged in play with the does? O elephant, methinks thou dost know
about the daughter of Janaka having thighs resembling thy trunk; pray
tell me if thou hast beheld her. O tiger, fearlessly do thou relate unto
me if thou hast seen my beloved Maithilee, having a countenance
resembling Moon. O dear! O thou having eyes like unto lotuses! why dost
thou fly away? Surely have I seen thee. Why dost thou not address me
hiding thyself behind the tree? Wait, wait, O thou fair damsel, thou
hast no compassion for me! Never hadst thou mock me before in this way!
Why dost thou neglect me now? O exquisitely fair damsel, truly have I
found thee out from this thy yellow silken cloth. I have seen thee
flying away. Stand if thou hast any love for me. Or, O thou having a
sweet smile, thou art not she; truly thou hast been killed or else thou
wouldst not have neglected me at this time of dire affliction. True it
is that she hath been devoured in my absence by the Rākshasas living on
flesh having torn into pieces her limbs. Truly hath her face, resembling
the full-moon, having beautiful teeth a fine nose and white Kundalas,
become of pale countenance being brought under the possession of the
Rākshasas. Her neck had the hue of sandal and was adorned with
necklace—that beautiful tender neck was eaten up by the Rākshasas, my
beloved wife wailing. Her arms were tender like leaves and adorned with
various ornaments; truly have the Rākshasas eaten them up, shaken as
they were, by throwing them here and there. Alas! did I leave her alone
only to be devoured by the Rākshasas? And she hath been eaten up like
one weak and helpless albeit she has many friends. O Lakshmana, O thou
of mighty-arms, hast thou seen where my dear wife is? O dear! O Sitā!
where hast thou gone?" Bewailing again and again in this strain Rāma
began to range the forest. Sometimes leaping, sometimes walking in an
uncertain direction, again and again he looked like one void of sense.
And again intent on searching Sitā he furiously engaged in traversing
the rivers, mountains, fountains and the woods. He could not wait
paitently anywhere. Entering a vast forest he searched every nook and
corner for Maithilee; his desire was not satisfied and he again engaged
with great labour in the finding out of his dear spouse.




## SECTION LXI.


Beholding the hermitage and cottage desolate and the seats strewn here
and there, Rāma the son of Daçaratha looked around. And finding Sitā
nowhere he raised up his beautiful arm and broke out into lamentations
saying, "O Lakshmana where is Sitā? Where has she gone hence? O
Saumitri, who hath carried away my dear one or who hath devoured her? O
Sitā, if wishest thou to mock me, hiding thyself behind the tree,
enough—enough it is—console me who am exercised with grief. O pleasant
Sitā, without thee these faithful little deer have engaged in meditation
being bathed in tears. Without Sitā I shall not breathe, O Lakshmana. A
mighty grief hath overtaken me in consequence of her being carried away.
My father the monarch shall surely behold me in the next world and ask
me ’I engaged thee in the observance of a vow; without fulfilling that,
why hast thou come here? O shame on thee!’ For certain shall my father
address me with these words relating to my passionate, false and base
conduct. All my desires have now been baffled and I have lost all
control over myself and have been exercised with grief. O fine damsel, O
thou of slender waist, where dost thou repair leaving me behind like
unto fame renouncing a person of vicious nature? Without thee I shall
renounce my own life." Being desirous of seeing Sitā, Rāma afflicted
with grief began to bewail in this strain, but did not behold the
daughter of Janaka. Being sunk in grief on Sitā’s account he became worn
out like unto an elephant fallen in mud. Thereat for his well being,
Lakshmana spoke unto him saying, "O thou of mighty intellect— do not
grieve. Do thou put forth thy endeavours along with me. There is that
high hill, O hero, containing many a cave. Maithili who is fond of
ranging the forest and ever delighteth in beholding the flowery woods,
must have entered therein or have gone to the watering-place blooming
with flowerets and lotuses. She has gone to the river abounding in fish
and _Banjulas_ or has hidden herself somewhere in the forest to frighten
us and to know, O best of men, how we can search her out. O thou of
great beauty, let us soon engage in quest of her. O Kākuthstha, if
thinkest thou that she is somewhere in this forest, we shall leave no
quarter untried. Do thou not grieve." After Lakshmana had spoken thus
out of fraternal affection, Rāma, with a composed heart, set out along
with him in quest of Sitā. And searching every nook and corner of the
mountains, rivers, ponds, table-lands, hills and summits they found Sitā
nowhere. And searching thus all the mountains Rāma spake unto Lakshmana
saying "Behold not I the auspicious Vaidehi on this mountain, O
Saumitri." Ranging the entire forest of Dandaka, Lakshmana, sore
distressed, spake unto his brother of flaming energy, saying "Surely
shalt thou come by Maithili the daughter of Janaka like unto the mighty
armed Vishnu obtaining this earth after having bound Vāli." Being thus
addressed by the heroic Lakshmana, Rāghava, greatly afflicted with
sorrow, replied in piteous accents—"O thou of mighty intellect I have
searched every nook of this forest, this pool abounding in blown
lotuses, and this mountain containing many a cave and fountain; but
nowhere have I seen Vaidehi dearer than my life." Thus bewailing Rāma,
racked with sorrow consequent on Sitā, being carried away, became poorly
and afflicted with grief and swooned away for sometime. He lost his
sense and his whole frame was worked with grief. Being grfeatly anxious
and breathless he sighed hot and fast and began to lament. And sobbing
again and again the lotus-eyed Rāma bewailed with his voice choked with
the vapour of grief, exclaiming "Ah Sitā!" Thereat his dear brother
Lakshmana, aggrieved, consoled him with joined hands. But passing by the
words dropping from Lakshmana’s lips Rāma again and again bewailed not
beholding his dear Sitā.




## SECTION LXII.


Not beholding Sitā the virtuous-souled Rāma, of mighty arms, having eyes
resembling lotuses, beside himself with grief, lamented (in many a way).
Pierced with the shafts of Manmatha, Rāghava, as if beholding Sitā
though he actually did not see her, uttered the following piteous
accents—"O my dear, thou delightest greatly in flowers. Covering thy own
person with _Asoka_ twigs thou art increasing my grief. Thy thighs are
like unto the trunks of plantain trees and thou hast hidden thyself
behind the plantain grove. But I percieve thee, O fair one, thou art
incapable of keeping thyself hidden. O auspicious one, thou hast entered
smiling the _Karnikar_ grove. No more with thy pastime, O dear one,
leading to my death. Moreover it is not proper to sport in this way in a
hermitage. I know it full well, O my dear, that thou art by nature fond
of pastimes. But O thou of expansive eyes, this cottage lieth desolate,
do thou come here. Evident it is that Sitā hath either been devoured by
the Rākshasas or carried away by them, and therefore she doth not
approach me, O Lakshmana, who am thus bewailing. These deer, O
Lakshmana, with tearful eyes have been as if declaring that Sitā hath
been devoured by the night-rangers. O chaste one, O thou of exquisitely
fine hue, O worshipful madam, whither hast thou repaired? O Sitā, truly
hath the desire of Kaikeyi been fulfilled to-day. I came out with Sitā
and shall return home without her. How shall I enter again that inner
apartment void of Sitā? Surely shall the people blame me as being cruel
and destitute of energy. That I have no prowess hath already been
manifested in the destruction of Sitā. When the king Janaka shall come
to me after my return home from exile, to ask me of my welfare how shall
I meet him? And surely shall he be overwhelmed with grief on his
daughter’s account when he shall find me without Sitā. Blessed is my
father since he is in heaven now. I shall not repair to that city
protected by Bharata. Without her even the heaven itself appears to me
as desolate. Do thou therefore repair to the city of Ayodhya leaving me
in this forest. By no means shall I breathe without her. Embracing him
warmly do thou tell Bharata, as instructed by me— ’Rāma hath given thee
permission to administer this kingdom.’ As ordered by me do thou with
proper respect salute all my mothers Kauçalya, Kaikeyi and Sumitrā and
protect them all with great care and respectful compliments. O destroyer
of foes, do thou relate at length unto my mother the story of Sitā’s
destruction." Rāma bewailing thus, being overwhelmed with grief on
account of his separation from Sitā having a head of fine hair,
Lakshmana became of pale countenance and was greatly distressed at
heart.




## SECTION LXIII.


That son of a king, stricken as he was with grief consequent upon
separation from his dear one, was again overwhelmed with a terrible
grief after causing sorrow unto his brother. Sunk in the abyss of grief,
Rāma, sighing hot and weeping piteously, spoke unto Lakshmana who was
equally aggrieved, words worthy of being said on that occasion. "Me
thinks there is none other on this earth like me, the perpetrator of
vicious crimes. My heart or soul is not riven though crushed again and
again without respite with a multitude of doleful events. Surely did I
perpetrate many a vicious deed in my previous birth, the fruit of which
I do now suffer and in consequence whereof misfortune after misfortune
hath befallen me. Coming within the compass of my remembrance, the loss
of my kingdom, the death of my father, the separation of my mother and
other kinsmen culminates my grief. Repairing unto woods, O Lakshmana, in
Sitā’s company my grief was assuaged, nay I did not suffer physical
affliction even. Without Sitā these sorrows have grown anew like unto
fire flaming again by means of fuel. Truly my wife, timid as she is,
hath been carried away by a Rākshasa by the etherial track. Alas I
doubtless it is, that one of pleasant accents, wept piteously out of
fear many a time and oft. For certain my dear wife’s breast round and
sprinkled as it was with red sandal paste, was bathed in blood (while
devoured by the Rākshasas)—but there is no death for me. That
countenance the beauty of which was enhanced by a head of curly hair and
which used to emit forth tender, soft and clear accents, hath become
pale, being taken possession of by the Rākshasas like unto the Moon
almost devoured by Rāhu. Surely have the Rākshasas subsisting on gore
drunk her blood in the sky tearing oft the neck of my dear one ever
devoted to pious observances. Surely did that one of beautifully
expansive eyes cry aloud poorly like unto a hind when she was drawn
hither and thither by the Rākshasas encircling her in the forest in my
absence. O Lakshmana, sitting at the foot of this hill with me that
large-hearted, pious Sitā, of smilling countenance, used to address thee
on many a topic. This is Godavari, the best of rivers, my dear wife took
delight in her— has she gone there?—But she never goes there alone. Or
has Jānaki having eyes resembling lotus-petals hath gone to bring
lotuses? But how is that possible, she never goes without me to bring
lotuses. Hath she entered at her pleasure this forest filled with many
flowery trees and diverse birds? But that is not possible too—she is
timid and feareth much to enter alone in this forest. O Aditya, knowest
thou the pious and vicious actions of men; beareth thou testimony to the
truth and untruth of their actions—do thou tell me, pray, who am striken
with grief, whither hath my dear one repaired, or whether hath she been
killed? O Air, there is nothing on earth which is not within the compass
of thy vision, do thou relate unto me whether Sitā preserving the fame
of my ancestry, hath been killed or carried away or if she waiteth on
the way." After Rāma had bewailed thus being beside himself with grief,
Saumitri, ever treading the right path and not of poorly mind spoke
words worthy of being said on that occasion.—"Do thou take heart
renouncing thy grief and engage with energy in quest of Sitā. Persons of
high energy are never exhausted on the earth even in the face of arduous
works." The highly powerful Lakshmana having spoken thus being afflicted
with grief, Rāma, the best of Raghu’s descendants, did not consider that
worth pondering over. Renouncing patience he again indulged in excessive
grief.




## SECTION LXIV.


Rāma stricken with grief spake unto Lakshmana the following piteous
words saying, "O Lakshmana, do thou speedily repair to the river
Godaveri and learn if Sitā hath gone there to fetch lotuses." Being thus
addressed by Rāma, the quick-paced Lakshmana went to the pleasant stream
Godaveri. Reconnoitering full well the river containing many a
watering-place Lakshmana spake unto Rāma saying, "Searched have I all
the watering-places but have found her nowhere—anon I cried aloud but
she did not hear. I cannot trace whither hath Vaidehi of slender waist
repaired ever assuaging our mental affliction." Hearing Lakshmana’ s
words, Rāma, aggrieved and overwhelmed with sorrow repaired in person to
the river Godaveri. Arriving there cried he "Where is Sitā?" Neither did
the world of creatures nor the river Godaveri apprise Rāma of Sitā’s
being carried away by the Lord of Rākshasas worthy of being slain.
Thinking of the terrible figure and monstrous actions of that
vicious-souled Rāvana, that river did not dare relate unto him anything
about Sitā, albeit appointed by the creatures to relate the story
concerning her and accosted by Rāma in piteous accents. Being thus
disappointed by the river in beholding Sitā, Rāma racked with her
separation spake unto Lakshmana saying "O thou of auspicious looks, this
river Godavari doth give no reply. But O Lakshmana, returning without
her what shall I say unto Janaka and Vaidehi’s mother? Where hath that
Vaidehi gone who used to assuage my grief who had been deprived of
kingdom and living in this forest on wild fruits and vegetables? Nights
shall appear too long unto me, keeping late hours being deprived of my
kinsmen and relatives and not beholding Vaidehi. I can range this
Mandākini, this Janasthāna and this Pasrabana hill if I can find Sitā
there. Behold, O hero, the high deer have been casting their looks again
and again at men; methinks from their gestures, they intend speaking
something uoto me." Beholding them, Rāghava, the best of men, looked at
them and said in accents choked with vapour—"Where is Sitā?" Being thus
addressed by that Lord of men the deer rose up all on a sudden and
looked up to the sky facing the south and proceeded to the direction by
which Maithili had been carried away. And moving by that way these deer
eyed the Lord of men and again and again fixed their looks upon that way
and earth and passed along emitting cries which was marked by Lakshmana.
He marked with attention their movements and cries and spake unto his
elder brother like one aggrieved saying—"Being accosted by thee
with—’Where is Sitā?’ these deer have stood up all on a sudden and have
been pointing to the south and earth— let us therefore proceed in this
direction—it may be that we shall either meet with that worshipful madam
or find some mementos concerning her." Thereat Kākuthstha, gifted with
supreme beauty, proceeded towards the south being followed by Lakshmana
and casting his look upon the earth. While proceeding thus, conversing
with each other the two brothers beheld some flowers scattered on the
high-way.

Beholding a collection of flowers scattered on earth, Rāma, exceedingly
sorry, spake unto Lakshmana in piteous accents saying "O Lakshmana, 1
have come to know that these are the flowers of the forest I gave
Vaidehi; with these she decorated her hair. Me thinks the sun, the air
and the famed earth have preserved them for my well-being." Having
spoken these words unto Lakshmana, the best of men, the virtuous-souled
Rāma, of mighty arms, addressed the mountain in front of him containing
many fountains, saying—"0 thou the best of mountains, hast thou beheld
in this picturesque forest-land, that exquisitely fine damsel racked
with my separation?" Exceedingly wroth he accosted the mountain like
unto a lion addresing a little deer, saying "Show me my graceful Sitā
hued like gold before I crush down thy summits." Being thus addressed by
Rāma on Maithili’s account the mountain did not show him Sitā. Again
addressed him Rāma—"Thou shalt by the fire of my arrows, be reduced to
ashes—thy twigs and leaves shall be totally destroyed and no one shall
resort to thee. O Lakshmana, I shall dry up this river Godavari if it
telleth me not about Sitā having a moon-like countenance." Rāma,
exceedingly wroth, cast his looks around as if desiring to burn
everything with his eyes and beheld footprints of the Rākshasas on the
earth as well as those of Sitā moving wildly hither and thither,
terrified and desirous to see Rāma, while pursued by the Rākshasas.
Beholding these footmarks, the snapped bow, the quiver and the chariot
broken into many pieces, Rāma, terrified spake unto his dear brother.
"Behold O, Lakshmana, the remnants of Vaidehi’s golden ornaments, strewn
hither and thither, and diverse garlands. Behold O Saumitri, the earth
covered with drops of blood resembling golden drops. Methinks, O
Lakshmana, Vaidehi hath been devoured by the Rākshasas assuming shapes
at will, having sundered her in pieces. O Saumitri, there took place a
terrible conflict between the Rākshasas, fighting with each other on
Sitā’s account. O gentle one, whose is this snapped bow lying on the
breast of the earth adorned and crested with pearls and diamonds? O
brother, this belongs either to the celestials or to the Rākshasas.
Whose is this golden armour lying shattered on earth, resembling the
newly risen sun; in color and adorned with sapphire? Whose is this
umbrella lying broken on earth, containing a hundred rod and adorned
with celestial garlands? In whose conflict have these terrible asses, of
large proportions, having faces of demon and with breast plates, been
killed? Whose is this shattered war-car lying upset on the ground and
broken flag resembling in lustre the burning gold? Whose are these
terrible arrows feathered in gold, measuring four-hundred fingers, lying
without blades on earth? Behold, O Lakshmana, these two quivers have
been totally spoiled though filled with arrows. Whose charioteer is this
who hath been killed with reins and lash in hands? These foot-marks must
be some Rākshasa’s. I made these Rākshasas my fatal enemies, assuming
shapes at will and of crooked hearts. Poor Sitā must have been either
dead, carried away by them or devoured. Virtue did not save her from
being carried away in this mighty forest. O Lakshmana, while virtue did
not protect Jānaki being devoured or taken away by stealth, what person
else gifted with heavenly power, on this earth shall bring about my
well-being? For this it is that people through ignorance disregard the
ever kind Almighty—the lord of creatures and the best of the celestials.
Truly shall the celestials regard me as one devoid of prowess, who am
mild-tempered, kind, ever engaged in the welfare of the humanity, and
have controlled all my senses. Observe, O Lakshmana, obtaining me as the
stay these accomplishments have been turned into so many blemishes.
Truly shall my prowess manifest itself to-day overshadowing all my other
accomplishments for the destruction of the Rākshasas and all created
beings like unto the rising of the Sun casting the Moon into shade on
the day of dissolution. None shall enjoy felicity, O Lakshmana,—Yakshas,
Gandharbas, Picachas, Rākshasas, Kinnaras, or human beings. Today shall
the welkin be filled up with my arrows. Motionless shall I make all the
animals inhabiting the three worlds. I shall arrest the movement of the
planets and overshadow the Moon. Stopping the course of the wind and
destroying the rays of the Sun and fire I shall envelope the earth with
darkness, crush down the summits of the mountains, dry up the pools,
blow up the creepers, demolish the Ocean and erradicate the trees. If
the celestials do not give me back my Sitā I shall bring about the
dissolution of the three worlds which would else have been wrought by
time. O son of Sumitrā, instantly shall the celestials headed by Indra,
meet with my prowess, if they do not give back my Sitā, ever advancing
my wellfare. None shall be able to range the welkin. Behold Lakshmana,
being perpetually crushed down by my arrow’s shot off my bow, the world
shall be disturbed and dislodged and the animals and birds shall be
confused and destroyed. Stretching the bow to my ears I shall make the
world, for Sitā’s sake, void of Pisachas and Rākshasas with my arrows
incapable of being withstood by created beings. To-day shall the
celestials behold the power of my arrows coursing a long distance shot
through my ire. Three worlds destroyed on account of my wrath,
celestials, Dānavas, Pisachas or Rākshasas,—none shall be saved. The
dwellings of the celestials, Asuras, Yakshas and Rākshasas shall fall
down sundered by my arrows into diverse pieces. I shall dislodge the
whole world by my arrows. If the celestials do not give me back my
Vaidehi dead or carried away or as she was before, I shall destroy the
whole world mobile or immobile and disturb all with my arrows until I
see her." Having spoken thus, Rāma, with his eyes reddened with ire and
lips swollen, tying fast his bark and deer-skin, braided his matted
locks. Having done this, being exceedingly wroth he looked like Rudra
about to destroy Tripura. Thereat taking his bow from Lakshmana and
holding it fast, the effulgent Rāma, the conqueror of foes, fixed
flaming arrows to it like so many serpents and said being exercised with
ire like unto fire on the eve of dissolution.—"O Lakshmana none shall be
able to withstand me, who am inflamed with rage, as debility consequent
on old age, death, time, duty are incapable of being averted from their
destined ends by the animals. I shall bring about a mighty revolution in
the world containing the celestials Gandharba, human beings, Pannagas
and the mountains, if I do not get back, in her pristine beauty, my
Sitā, the daughter of the King of Mithilā."




## SECTION LXV.


Rāma highly aggrieved on account of Sitā’s being carried away,
addressing himself to destroy the world like unto the fire of
dissolution and casting his look, sighing again and again, upon the
stringed bow like unto Mahadev desirous of burning down the whole world
at the time of dissolution, Lakshmana, having his countenance dried up,
beholding his rage not seen before, began with folded hands—"Ere this
thou hadst been gentle, self-controlled and engaged in the welfare of
all beings. It doth not behove thee now to renounce thy natural temper
being influenced by ire. Ever manifested itself in thee, glory _par
excellence_ like unto splendour in the Moon, lustre in the Sun, motion
in the wind and forgiveness in the Earth. It becometh thee not to
devastate the whole world for the crime of an individual being. Methinks
for certain, this shattered car must be the property of an individual
person, not of many. But I do not know whose is this car with yokes and
dresses and what for it hath been shattered? Behold, O thou the son of a
King, this terrible spot bathed in blood and raked with hoofs and
wheels. Surely here took place a conflict. O thou the foremost of those
skilled in speech, it appeareth from these signs that this skrimish did
take place with one, not with two. Here are not to be seen the
fool-marks of a large army. It therefore doth not behove thee to destroy
the whole world for one’s individual offence. Kings, gentle and mild by
nature, do always administer punishment, proportionate to the amount of
offence. Thou art always the stay and the best refuge of all animals.
Who shall think well, O Rāghava, of the destruction of thy wife? The
celestials, Dānavas, Gandharbhas, rivers, seas, and mountains—none can
act unfriendly by thee as the learned priests cannot act improperly
towards those initiated by them. It is thy duty, O king, with bow in
hand to search out the person who hath carried away Sitā, along with me
and the devotees. Explore shall we, with great care, the seas, the
forest, the mountains, the fearful caves, the pools and the abodes of
the celestials and Gandharbas until we find out the person who hath
carried away thy wife. If the celestials do not return thee peacefully
thy wife, O Lord cf Koçala, thou shalt adopt measures, befitting the
occassion. Thou shalt then uproot the whole world, O lord of men, with
thy gold-featherd arrows resembling the thunderbolt of Mahendra,if thou
dost not come by thy wife by resorting to good conduct, self-control,
lowliness and polity."




## SECTION LXVI.


Rama bewailing thus like one helpless being stricken with grief,
overwhelmed with sorrow and losing control over himself, Lakshmana
touched his feet and consoling him instantly began:—"By constant
asceticism and manifold pious observances king Daçaratha obtained thee
like unto the celestials obtaining ambrosia. As I have heard from
Bharata, king Daçaratha died for thy separation, attached as he was unto
thee for thy accomplishments. O Kākuthstha, if dost thou not bear
patiently this impending peril what little-minded person else shall bear
it? Compose thyself, O thou best of men. Peril overtaketh every body
like unto fire but vanisheth in no time. This is the nature of men.
Yayati, the son of king Nahusha, though attained to the state of
celestials, was however thrown down for an iniquitous deed. The hundred
sons, that had been born unto our ancestral priest Vasishtha, were all
killed in one day. O lord of Kerala, even Vasumati, the mother of the
world, adored of all beings, meeteth with mesery consequent upon
earth-quake. Even the mighty Sun and Moon witness eclipse who are the
eyes of the world and the very images of virtue and in whom the whole
world is stationed. O thou best of men, what of insignificant beings
cased in this frail body, even the mighty creatures and celestials are
subject to the influence of destiny. I have heard, O best of men, even
the celestials headed by Indra are subject to happiness or misery. So it
doth not behove thee to bewail thus. O descendant of Raghu, it becometh
thee not to lament like an ordinary person even if Jānaki is dead or
hath been carried away. O Rāma, persons, highly experienced and
ascertaining right or wrong without being moved, do not lament even in
the face of mighty perils. O thou best of men, do thou, after due
consideration, ascertain what is proper or improper; persons of thy vast
wisdom are cognizant of the right or wrong by dint of their
understanding. Without proper exercise, actions, of unknown merit and
uncertain issue do not bear fruits. O hero, many a time and oft ere
this, thou hadst given me the self-same counsel. Who is capable of
counselling thee who art the very preceptor of the gods? O thou of great
intellect, even the celestials cannot measure thy mental acumen. Greatly
benumbed is thy wisdom with the slumber of grief, and I am to rouse it.
O thou the best of Ikshakus, do thou engage in the destruction of thy
foes considering well thy celestial and human prowess. O thou best of
men, what necessity hast thou to destroy the whole world? Do thou rescue
Sitā after finding out thy vicious enemy."




## SECTION LXVII.


After Lakshmana had spoken these highly sound and pleasant words, Rāma,
ever taking to what is sound, accepted them. Thereupon that one, of
mighty arms, slaking his flaming ire and reclining himself upon his
beautiful bow, addressed Lakshmana, saying, "Do thou ponder over, O
brother, where shall we repair, what shall we do and by what means shall
we come by Sitā?" Whereto Lakshmana replied saying unto the highly
aggrieved Rāma, "It is proper for thee to search this Janasthāna filled
with a multitude of Rākshasas and covered with diverse trees and
creepers. Here are many strongholds in the midst of mountains, clefts of
rocks, many caves and numerous cavities filled with various animals.
Many are the abodes here belonging to the Kinnaras and Gandharbas. Do
thou, along with me, search all these places. Great men, of thy calibre,
do remain unagitated even in the midst of difficulties like unto
mountains never shaken by the velocity of the wind." Hearing these
words, Rāma, enraged, fixing sharp and terrible arrows to his bow, began
to range the forest with Lakshmana. Thereupon he beheld, fallen on
ground, having his person bathed in blood, the king of birds—Yatāyu,
resembling a mountain peak, and spake unto Lakshmana, saying "It is
clear and beyond all doubt that Vaidehi hath been devoured by this
Rākshasa, assuming the shape of a vulture and ranging the forest. This
Rākshasa hath been reposing at ease after devouring that one of
expansive eyes; I shall kill him with terrible straight-coursing arrows,
having flaming points." Fixing sharpened shafts to his bow, Rāma,
enraged, darted towards the vulture, as if moving the sea-girt earth.
Vomitting frothy blood Yatāyu, the king of vultures, spoke unto Rāma,
the son of Daçaratha, saying ’O thou of long life, that goddess, whom
thou hast been searching in this vast forest like unto _Oshadhi_, and my
life have been carried away by Rāvana. I saw her, O Rāghava, carried
away stealthily by the powerful Rāvana, in thy absence as well as that
of Lakshmana. Myself Hearing Sitā, for her rescue, O Lord, Rāvana was
thrown down On earth by me in conflict having his car and unbrella
shattered. This is his snapped bow and these are his broken shafts. And
this is his war-car, O Rāma, shattered in fight. This is his charioteer
lying On earth being killed by the velocity of my wings. Having sundered
my wings with his dagger, who had been exhausted, Rāvana taking Sitā,
rose high up in the welkin. It behoveth thee not to kill me who had been
wounded before by the Rākshasa." Hearing from him pleasant words
relating to Sitā, Rāma, leaving aside, instantly, his mighty bow,
embraced him, and rolling on earth having lost self-control through
grief, began to lament with Lakshmana. Though highly composed by nature,
he was dverwhelmed with doubled grief. And beholding Yatāyu, sigh again
and again and breathing with difficulty in a helpless plight, Rāma,
highly aggrieved, spake unto Lakshmana saying, "I have lost my kingdom
and have been living in this forest. My Sitā hath been carried away and
this bird hath been killed (on my account)—This misfortune of mine can
burn even the very fire. If for assuaging my grief I do enter the mighty
ocean, verily shall that misfortune dry up even that lord of rivers.
There is none so unfortunate as I, throughout this earth, mobile or
immobile, and it is for this bad luck that I have confronted this mighty
disaster. This mighty king of vultures is our father’s friend and he
lieth on earth, killed through the evil turn of my fortune." Uttering
these and various other words, Rāghava, along with Lakshmana touched his
body manifesting his paternal affection. Embracing the king of vultures,
bathed in blood, having its wings cut off, Rāghava, fell on the ground,
exclaiming ’where hath Maithilee gone like unto my life?’




## SECTION LXVIII.


Beholding Yatāyu fallen on the ground by the terrible Rākshasa, Rāma
spoke unto Lakshmana, having compassion for all, saying "Verily for my
service this bird hath breathed its last, being killed by the Rākshasa.
O Lakshmana, its voice hath been enfeebled, its vision weakened and its
life, greatly exhausted, lieth in a very little proportion in its body.
May good betide thee, O Yatāyu; if thou art capable speaking again, do
thou relate how Sitā hath been carried away and thou hast been killed.
Why hath Rāvana taken away by stealth the worshipful Jānaki? What
offence did I commit by him that he hath carried away my dear one? O
thou best of birds, how looked the moon-like, pleasant countenance of
Sitā at the time of her being carried away? What did she speak then?
What is the prowess, appearance and action of that Rākshasa? Where doth
he live, O reverend Sir? Pray tell me, I do ask thee." Beholding Rāma,
lament like one helpless, the virtuous-souled Yatāyu spake in faltering
accents—"Sitā hath been carried away by Rāvana, the lord of Rākshasas,
creating a mighty illusion producing wind and showers. O darling, myself
being worn out that night-ranger, having sundered my wings, fled away
with Sitā to the southerly direction. O Rāghava, my life is about to
expire, my eye-sight hath grown of mistaken perception, I see trees
before me made of gold having hair resembling _Ushira_.⁶² Rāvana hath
taken away Sitā at a moment when a person regains soon his lost
property. O Kākuthstha, this moment is called _Vindya_,⁶³ which Rāvana
hath not been able to perceive. (At this moment) the person who taketh
away (a thing) is soon destroyed like unto a fish devouring a hook. Do
not therefore entertain the least doubt about thy coming by Jānaki.
Destroying him at the head of the battle thou shalt soon sport with
Vaidehi." Thereupon flesh and gore began to come out of the mouth of
Yatāyu, the king of vultures, not loosing his sense even while treading
the verge of death. Thereupon the king of birds gave up his dear life
uttering only.—"Rāvana is the son of Vishravā and brother to Vaishravana
(the lord of wealth)." Rāma again and again addressed him with joined
palms saying, "Do thou speak! Do thou speak." And instantly Yatāyu’s
vital spark rose up in the sky, leaving his bodily frame. Thereupon the
king of vultures fell down on the earth by stretching forth his legs,
body and head on the ground. Beholding the vulture dead, of huge
proportions, resembling a hill and having red eyes, Rāma, aggrieved,
spoke piteously unto Saumitri, saying—"Living happily, for years, in
this forest of Dandaka inhabited by the Rākshasas, Yatāyu hath, at last,
given up his life. He lived for a long time, of an uplifted person, and
hath now laid low on the earth. None can withstand the course of
destiny. Observe, Lakshmana, this vulture for my benefaction, hath been
killed by the powerful Rāvana in his attempt to rescue Sitā. For me,
hath this Lord of birds, breathed his last, renouncing his large
ancestral kingdom. In every status of animal creation, the heroic, the
righteous and the honest, affording refuge unto all, are to be found,
even amongst the birds. I do not feel so much affliction, O hero, for
Sitā’s ravishment as I do for this vulture, who hath been killed for me.
Like unto the highly famous, effulgent king Daçaratha, this King of of
birds is worthy of being adored and worshipped by me. O Saumitri, do
thou bring fuels; I shall produce fire therewith and burn the dead body
of this king of birds who hath been killed on my account. Placing on a
funeral pile, I shall cremate, O Saumitri, the dead body of this king of
birds who hath been destroyed by the grim-visaged Rākshasas. Being
consecrated and commanded by me, do thou, O highly powerful king of
birds, attain to that excellent state of existence, which is reached by
persons ever performing pious observances, by _Ahitagnis_⁶⁴ by heroes
who are not afraid of entering a battle-field and by persons who confer
grants of land." Saying this the virtuous-souled Rāma, afflicted with
sorrow, burned the body of the king of birds, placing it on the funeral
pile, like unto his own kinsman. Entering the forest with Saumitri, Rāma
gifted with prowess, killed plump high deer and stretched forth grass
and twigs for offering oblation to that bird. Taking off the flesh of
those high deer and clustering it, Rāma, of great renown, offered it to
the vultures in that pleasant forest-land, abounding in green grass.
Thereupon for his speedy arrival at the abode of celestials, Rāma
recited those _Mantras_ which are being uttered by the twice-born ones.
Afterwards repairing to the river Gadāveri the two princes offered water
unto that kingly vulture. And offering water unto him according to the
prescribed rites of the _Sastras_, those two descendants of Raghu, after
bathing, performed the _Udaka_⁶⁵ ceremony for that king of vultures.
Having been killed in battle for an arduous but glorious work, that king
of vultures, consecrated by the ascetic-like Rāma, attained to an
excellent state. Having performed the _Udaka_ ceremony for that best of
birds and considering him in the light of a father they went away and
entered the forest in quest of Sitā like unto the two best of
celestials—Visnu and Vasava.

   ⁶² Andropogon muricatum—(Lat). The root of a fragrant grass. This
      alludes to a terrible vision which is generally seen by a person
      on the eve of death—a golden tree having hair.—T.

   ⁶³ This refers to _Jatāyu’s_ astrological knowledge. _Vindya_ is
      derived from the root _Vid_—-to gain. Thus this moment is
      favourable to the loser and unfavourable to the taker. Hence
      Rāvana carrying away Sitā at this moment shall meet with
      destruction.—T.

   ⁶⁴ A _Brahman_ who has preserved a sacred fire kept alive perpetually
      in a family, &c.,—from _ahita_—placed, _agni_—fire.—T.

   ⁶⁵ Presentation of water specially to the manes as a religious or
      obsequal rite.—T.




## SECTION LXIX.


Having offered him the gift of water, those two descendants of Raghu
wended their way in that forest in quest of Sitā and proceeded towards
the south-west.⁶⁶ Then turning to the south, with bow and arrows in
hand, they reached a track not wended by the people. It was a ghastly,
impenetrable forest, covered on all sides with groves, trees and
creepers. Proceeding by the southerly direction, those two mighty ones,
passed hastily by that terrible, dreary forest. Thereupon, the highly
effulgent descendants of Raghu entered the dense forest of _Krauncha_,
situated at a distance of six miles from _Janasthāna_. It was a dense
forest like unto a collection of clouds, as if smiling on all sides
blooming with charming flowers of diverse hues and frequented by various
animals and birds. Waiting for sometime here and there they, exercised
with Sitā’s ravishment, explored the entire forest in quest of Vaidehi.
Proceeding three Krosas towards the East and passing by the forest of
Krauncha the two brothers descried on their way the asylum of Matanga.
Having seen that dreary forest frequented by various animals and birds
and covered with diverse trees and dense groves, the two sons of
Daçaratha beheld a cave in the mountain, deep as the region under the
earth and ever enveloped with darkness. Arriving there they espied hard
by a grim visaged Rākshasi, having a formidable figure, ever causing
fright unto persons of feeble courage, loathesome, terrible-looking,
having a huge belly, sharpened teeth, a high person and rough skin,
devouring voracious animals and looking fearful with dishevelled hair.
Beholding there the two brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana, she neared the
heroes and saying, ’come, we shall sport’ assailed Lakshmana who had
been going before his brother. And embracing him she spake unto Saumitri
the following words—"My name is Ayomukhee; it is a great gain to thee
that thou hast become my beloved one, O my lord. Do thou sport with me,
for ever, O hero, in these mountainous strongholds and on the banks of
the rivers." Thereat, exercised with ire, Lakshmana, the subduer of
foes, uplifting his dagger, chopped off her nose, ears and breast.
Having her nose and ears cut off, that terrible-looking Rākshasi,
emitting fearful cries, fled away whence she had come. On her departure,
proceeding quickly, the two brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana, the conquerors
of foes, reached a dense forest. Thereupon the highly effulgent and
truthful Lakshmana, possessing a pure character, spake, with folded
hands, unto his brother of flaming energy—"My left arm is throbbing, my
mind is filled with anxiety and I perceive before me many a bad omen. Do
thou put on thy habiliments, O worshipful one, and act by what I say for
thy well-being. Methinks from these bad omens some calamity shall soon
befall us. O Rāma, this terrible bird _Banchulaka_ is emitting fearful
cries as if announcing our victory in the conflict." Thereupon while
they began to explore the entire forest with their prowess there arose a
terrible sound as if breaking down the wood. The forest was enveloped on
all sides with a mighty wind and everywhere was audible a roar filling
the wood-land. With a view to ascertain whence the sound proceeded,
Rāma, with a dagger in hand, along with his younger brother, espied a
Rākshasha of huge proportions, having big thighs. The two brothers
beheld that Rākshasa stationed before them, having a huge body, devoid
of head and neck and therefore a headless demon and having its mouth on
its belly. Its body resembled a huge mountain and was covered with
sharpened down; its look was terrible like unto sable cloud and its roar
resembled the muttering where of. Its one terrible, expansive eye,
seeing all, was on the forehead placed on its breast and shone forth
like unto the flaming fire and it had huge yellow eye-lashes. Its mouth
was greatly widened and covered with rows of huge teeth and it was again
and again licking that terrible mouth. And stretching forth its two huge
arms extending over a _yojana_ it was devouring bears, lions and deer.
It was catching and throwing with its huge hands many an animal, bird
and bear. Hindering the way-fare it was awaiting those two brothers. And
proceeding a _Krosa_, they espied that fearful, grim-visaged, headless
demon, hindering all creatures with its arms, terrible-looking and
appearing like a _kavanda_ from its very situation. Thereupon that one,
of huge arms, stretching them forth, got hold of those two descendants
of Raghu crushing them with its strength. Those two highly powerful
brothers, of mighty arms, with daggers and bows in their hands, were
assailed and got hold of by that Rākshasha. Rāma was heroic and patient
by nature and consequently was not much afflicted; but Lakshmana was a
mere boy and impatient by nature and was consequently greatly afflicted.
Being greatly distressed, the younger brother of Rāghava spake unto him,
saying "Do thou behold me, O hero, brought under the hold of this
Rākshasha, and re-nouncing me only, O Rāghava, do thou get thyself off.
And offering me as sacrifice, do thou escape at thy ease. Methinks for
certain, O Kākuthstha, thou shalt soon come by Vaidehi and regain thy
anscestral kingdom. But remember me always, O Rāma, when thou shalt find
thyself placed on the throne." Being thus addressed by Lakshmana, Rāma
spake unto Saumitri—"Fear not in vain, O hero; persons of thy prowess
are never afflicted (with fear)." Meanwhile the wicked headless, demon,
of huge arms, the foremost of Dānaves, addressed the two brothers Rāma
and Lakshmana —"Who are ye two youthful figures having the neck of a
bull and with mighty daggers and bows in your hands? Arriving in this
fearful place ye have by chance come within the compass of my vision.
Tell me now what have ye to do here, and what for have ye come? I have
been waiting here being hungry, and ye have come here having daggers and
bows with arrows in your hands like unto two oxen having sharpened
horns. Nearing me quickly, it will be hard for ye to draw your vital
breath." Hearing those words of the vicious-souled _Kavandha_, Rāma
having his countenance dried up, bespake Lakshmana—"O thou, having truth
for thy prowess, again and again, greater and worse calamities have been
threatening us. We have already met with a dire disaster leading to our
death, consequent on my separation from my dear one. Mighty is the
course of Destiny in all creatures, O Lakshmana. Do thou O best of men,
behold even thyself and me stricken with calamity. But O Lakshmana it is
not very difficult for destiny to afflict all creatures. Under the
influence of destiny even the mighty heroes, well habited in armours are
distressed like unto a bridge of sands." Addressing these words unto
Saumitri, the resolute, powerful and highly famous son of Daçaratha,
having truth for his prowess, composed himself by dint of his own
understanding.

   ⁶⁶ In this Sloka _west_ is mentioned and in the next one there is
      reference to their turning to the _south_ and hence _west_ here
      refers to south-west. T.




## SECTION LXX.


Beholding both the brothers, Rāma and Lakshmana, clasping each other
with their arms, the headless demon spake:—"O two best of Kshatryas, are
ye waiting here beholding me hungry? O ye having lost your sense, ye
have been chosen by Destiny as my food." Hearing those words Lakshmana,
sore distressed and determined to display his valour, addressed Rāma
with words worthy of being said on that occasion. "This vile Rākshasa
shall seize both of us; let us sunder soon its two huge arms with our
daggers. This grim-visaged Rākshasa, of huge proportions, gifted only
with the strength of arms, defeating all other persons, hath addressed
itself at last to destroy us. It is odious for the Kshatryas to make
away with those who cannot defend themselves like unto animals brought
for sacrifice."⁶⁷ Hearing their conversation, the Rākshasa, inflamed
with rage, widening its terrible mouth, prepared to devour them up.⁶⁸
Thereat Rāma and Lakshmana, cognizant of time and place, pleased,⁶⁹
sundered its arms off its shoulders with their daggers. Rāma, stationed
on the right side⁷⁰ cut off in no time its right arm with his dagger and
the heroic Lakshmana, the left one. Having got its arms dissevered, the
terrible-voiced, _Kavandha_, of huge arms,roaring like unto the
muttering of clouds and resounding the heaven, earth and all the
quarters, fell flat on the ground. Beholding both its arms cut off, the
demon, with its person bathed in blood, asked them poorly—" Who are ye?"
Being thus accosted by _Kavandha_, the mighty Lakshmana, gifted with
auspicious marks, spake unto it, about Kākuthstha. "He is a descendant
of the Ikshwākus known on earth by the name of Rāma, and know me as his
younger brother, by name—Lakshmana. Being thwarted by mother (Kaikeyi)
in his accession of kingdom, he, renouncing all, hath fled as an exile
unto woods, and hath, along with me and his spouse, been ranging this
forest. While living in the dense forest the wife of Rāma, effulgent
like unto the celestials hath been ravished by a Rākshasa. Searching
her, have we come here. Who art thou? And what for art thou ranging this
forest like unto a headless demon, having thy thighs broken and thy
flaming face placed on thy breast?" Being thus addressed by Lakshmana
with these goodly words, _Kavandha_, pleased, recollecting the words of
Indra, bespake him,—"O two best of men, ye are welcome! By my good luck
it is that I do behold you. By my good fortune ye have dissevered my
shoulders to-day. Do ye hear. I shall relate truly unto you how have I,
by my haughtiness, come by this unsightly shape."

   ⁶⁷ The purport is:—Lakshmana wanted to chop off the arms of
      _Kavandha_ and not to put an end to its life as it was not capable
      of fighting, being a headless demon. And it is not proper for the
      Kshatryas to destroy those who cannot fight.—T.

   ⁶⁸ This has a special significance here—meaning to get hold of them
      by stretching forth its arms.—T.

   ⁶⁹ They were pleased because they cut off its arms with ease like
      unto the trunks of a plantain tree.—T.

   ⁷⁰ It may mean also _expert.—T._




## SECTION LXXI.


O mighty armed Rāma of great prowess, formerly my beauty, beyond
conception, was known all over the three worlds, like unto the beauty of
the Sun, the Moon and Indra. I used to frighten everywhere the ascetics
living in the forest by turning this my beauty into a terrific form.
Once on a time assuming this terrible shape I assailed and enraged the
great ascetic _Sthulashira_ collecting diverse wild fruits. Thereupon he
imprecated curses upon me, saying "Do thou retain this ghastly shape
hated of all mankind." Upon my praying unto that angry ascetic for my
relief from that curse, he said—"Thou shalt regain thy stalwart and
beautiful shape when thou shalt be burnt by Rāma in a dense forest
having got thy arms dissevered by him. O Lakshmana, know me to be the
beautiful son of Danu. Through Indra’s curse in the battle field I have
been metamorphosed into my present shape. After I had pleased him with
hard austerites, the Grand-Father of the celestials conferred on me a
long life. And therefore I was inflamed with pride and assailed Indra in
a conflict, thinking within me, ’I have gained a long life—what can
Indra do me?’ Thereupon by his thunderbolt, having hundred edges, hurled
off his hands, my thighs were shattered and my head thrusted into my
body. Myself praying for the close of my life, he did not despatch me to
the abode of Yama. He only said "May the words of the Grand Sire prove
true." Whereto I replied ’How shall I live long without any food, being
smitten by thee having a thunderbot in thy hand, and having my head,
thighs and mouth crushed down?’ Thereat Indra made my hands extending
over a _Yajana_ and placed my mouth, having sharpened teeth, on my
belly. Thenceforth, stretching out my long arms I used to devour all
lions, tigers, wolves and deer ranging the forest. Indra said to me,
Thou shalt attain to heaven when Rāma, along with Lakshmana, shall cut
off thy arms in a battle.’ Acting under the conviction that Rāma,
resolved to destroy my person, shall surely come within the compass of
my arms, I do always assail with relish, O worshipful one, O thou best
of kings, every animal I meet with in this forest. Thou art that Rāma.
May good betide thee, O Rāghava. Verily did the great ascetic speak unto
me that none should be able to assail me but Rāma. Being cremated by
you, I shall counsel you best and tell you with whom you should contract
friendship." Being thus addressed by Danu, the virtuous-souled Rāghava
spake before listening Lakshmana, "My renowned spouse Sitā was easily
ravished by Rāvana after I had gone out of Janasthāna along with my
brother. I know that Rākshasa’s name only—but do not know his
whereabouts, his figure and his prowess. It behoveth thee to show proper
compassion for us, who have been stricken with grief, who are helpless,
have been ranging this forest in this way and are ever engaged in the
well-being of others⁷¹ O, hero, we shall burn thee after collecting all
the branches that have been broken down by the elephants and dried up in
time, and digging a big trench. Do thou tell us who hath carried away
Sitā? And where? If dost thou know it truly do thou perform us this good
service." Thereat the Rākshasa, skilled in speech, spake unto Rāghava,
addressing him thus—"I am not gifted with divine fore-sight and
therefore do not know where Maithilee is. I shall let you know of him
who shall be able to tell you all about her, after I resume my original
shape, being burnt (by thee). I shall furthermore tell thee, O Rāma, who
knows that Rākshasa. Without being burnt I am incapable of being
cognizant of that highly powerful Rākshasa who hath carried away thy
Sitā. By the influence of curse, I have lost my fore-sight and by my own
improper actions I have been transformed into this ugly figure. Do thou
cremate me according to the prescribed rites after throwing me into the
ditch before the sun, with his worn out carriers descends into the
western horizon. Being burnt by thee in the ditch, with due ceremonials,
O descendant of Raghu, I shall mention, unto thee, one who knows that
Rākshasa. O Rāghava, O fleet-footed hero, do thou contract friendship
with him gifted with good qualities and he shall assist thee. There is
nothing unknown to him, O Rāghava in the three worlds. Formerly for some
reasons he had travelled all over them."

   ⁷¹ This Sloka may be rendered in another way:—Do thou continue
      benifitting us by showing proper compassion for us, who are
      stricken with grief helpless and ranging the forest in this way.
      We have however adopted here the commentator Rāmanuya’s
      explanation.—T.




## SECTION LXXII.


After _Kavandha_ had spoken thus, the two best of men, Rāma and
Lakshmana took him to a mountain-cave and placed on fire. Lakshmana
kindled the funeral pile, which was ablaze on all sides. Thereupon the
fire began to burn down slowly the huge and corpulent body of _Kavandha_
like unto a lump of clarified butter. Afterwards the highly powerful
demon, shaking the funeral pile, rose up quickly like a smokeless flame
of fire, wearing a clean cloth and a celestial garland. And the graceful
demon, wearing an unsullied cloth and having all its limbs crested with
diverse ornaments, rose from the pile high up in the welkin with a
delighted heart. Thereupon mounting on a famed car, brilliant and drawn
by swans⁷² and lighting up all the quarters with the effulgence of his
person, that highly powerful one, stationing himself in the heaven,
addressed Rāma, saying:—"Do thou hear truly, O Rāghava, of the means by
which thou shalt come by Sitā. There are six expedients,⁷³ O Rāma, by
virtue of which kings acquire all objects. He, in whom misfortune hath
culminated, should seek the company of one such.⁷⁴ Thou hast, O Rāma
along with Lakshmana, met with the culmination of misfortune and for
which thou hast been assailed with such a disaster as the ravishment of
thy spouse. O thou best of my friends, it behoveth thee, therefore to
make friends with such a person. Or else I do not find any means for thy
success. Do thou hear, O Rāma, what I relate. There liveth with four
monkeys a heroic, self-controlled monkey by name Sugriva, on that best
of mountains _Rishyamuka_, situated on the banks of the lake Pampā,
being driven by his enraged brother Vāli, the son of Indra. That mighty,
powerful, effulgent lord of monkeys, of immeasurable prowess and
truthful vows, humble, patient, intelligent, great, expert, bold,
graceful and puissant, hath been banished by his brother, O hero, for
kingdom. Surely he shall befriend and assist thee in thy search for
Sitā. Do thou not plunge thy soul in grief. O thou best of Ikshwākus,
none can withstand destiny on this earth, truly unavoidable is it
course. Do thou proceed soon, O hero, to Sugrivā of mighty prowess, and
repairing hence even to-day do thou contract friendship with him, taking
vow in the presence of flaming fire⁷⁵ that ye shall not envy each other.
Despise not that kingly monkey Sugrivā, because he is grateful, capable
of assuming shapes at will, seeking protection and powerful. Ye too are
able to accomplish his wished-for object. Benefitted by thee or not, he
shall engage in thy service. He was begotten of the Sun unto the wife of
_Rikhyraja_. He hath been roaming the bank of Pāmpa being in constant
fear of Vāli after creating enmity with him. Do thou make friends with
that monkey ranging the wood and inhabiting the Rishyamuka mountain
after placing thy weapon in the very presence of fire as a witness,
because that best of monkeys knoweth minutely all the abodes of
Rākshasas, living on human flesh. There is no place under the sun of
many rays, O Rāghava, O slayer of foes, unknown to him. Exploring, with
all his monkeys, the rivers, huge mountains, strongholds and caves, he
shall learn about thy spouse. He shall search that exquisitely fine
damsel Maithili in Rāvana’s abode, bewailing on thy separation; and to
find her out he shall despatch, O Rāghava, many a monkey of huge
proportions to various quarters. Whether on the summit of the mount Meru
or in the region under the earth, that lord of monkeys, shall give thee
back thy blameless spouse, killing all the Rākshasas."

   ⁷² By virtue of the pious observances performed by him in his
      previous existence and for his being burnt by Rāma that celestial
      car appeared there.—T.

   ⁷³ The six expedients are as follow—(1) _Sandhi_, peace, (2)
      _Vigraha_, war-fare. (3) _Yāna_, military expedition against an
      enemy. (4) _Ashana_—halting. (5) _Daidhibhava_—sowing dissension.
      (6) _Samashrarya_ seeking protection.—T.

   ⁷⁴ This is a moral law referring to the sixth expedient, to be
      resorted to by the kings—namely _Samashrarya_ or seeking
      protection.—T.

   ⁷⁵ This refers to the oriental custom of performing every sacred rite
      in the presence of fire as witness. The Hindus regard the fire
      with sacred reverence and for this in all their social and
      religious ceremonials fire plays a very prominent and sacred
      part—T.




## SECTION LXXIII.


Having pointed out unto Rāma the expedient for finding out Sitā the wise
_Kavandha_ began with the following significant words:—"This is the way,
O Rāma, leading to the mount Rishyamuka, where stand, beautifying the
West, the _Jambu_,⁷⁶ _Priāla_,⁷⁷ _Panaca_,⁷⁸ _Nagrodha_,⁷⁹ _Plaksha_,⁸⁰
_Tinduka_,⁸¹ _Ashathya_,⁸² _Karnikar_,⁸³ _Chuta_,⁸⁴ _Nāga_,⁸⁵
_Tilaka_,⁸⁶ _Naktamal_,⁸⁷ _Neelashok_,⁸⁸ _Cadamva_,⁸⁹ _Karavira_,⁹⁰
_Agnimukhya_,⁹¹ _Asoka_, _Raktachandan_,⁹² _Pāribhadraka_,⁹³ and many
other trees. Ascending those trees or lowering them by force on earth,
do thou proceed living on those fruits like unto ambrosia. Passing by
this forest, O Kākuthstha, thou shalt reach another abounding in trees
blooming with flowers like unto the garden of celestials and _Uttarkuru_
where in all the months of the year the trees produce fruits and honey
and where all the seasons dwell as in the forest of _Chaitkraratha_.⁹⁴
There stand beautifully many a tree lowered down with the burden of
fruits, containing towering branches, dense as a collection of clouds or
a mountain. Ascending those trees and lowering them, Lakshmana shall
offer thee, fruits like unto ambrosia. O heroes, ranging from forest to
forest, from high mountains to hillocks, ye shall get at the lake Pampā,
void of gravels and acquatic plants and hence there is no danger of
falling down to the people, having level watering-places, covered with
sands and blooming with red and white lotuses. There emit forth musical
notes, swans, frogs, cranes and ospreys sporting in the lake Pampā. They
are not filled with terror in view of human beings, inexperienced as
they are in the matter of destruction. O Rāghava, do ye fare on those
plump birds like unto a lump of clarified butter and diverse fishes such
as _Rohita_,⁹⁵ _Chakratunda_,⁹⁶ and _Nala_.⁹⁷ O Rāma, the devoted
Lakshmana, shall offer unto thee, various other best fishes, devoid of
scale and fins, plump, filled with bones, having destroyed them with
shafts and roasted them in fire. And after thou hadst feasted on them,
Lakshmana shall bring thee water for drinking on a lotus leaf, smelling
like a lotus, coming in contact with flowers, delicious, pleasantly
cold, wholesome, void of impurities, transparent like silver and
crystal. And while roaming in the evening he shall point out unto thee
fat monkeys ranging in the wood and lying in the hollows of mountains.
And thou too, O best of men, shalt behold those fat monkeys, who had
drunk water, roaring like unto oxen appearing on the banks of a river to
drink water. And rambling in the evening, thou shalt assuage thy grief
beholding the pleasant water of Pampā and blossoming trees. There, O
Rāghava, the _Tilakas_ and _Naktamalakas_, crested with flowers and full
blown white and red lotuses shall mitigate thy sorrows. There liveth no
person who wears garlands of those flowers. Garlands strung with those
flowers never wither away, O Rāghava, because the disciples of the great
ascetic Matanga lived there with concentrated hearts. Drops of
perspiration, falling on the earth from the persons of those ascetics
worn out with the burden of the wild fruits collected by them for their
spiritual guide, have been transformed by virtue of their asceticism
unto these garlands. These garlands do never wither, O Rāghava, because
of their origination from those drops of perspiration. Even at the
present day, O Kākuthstha, there liveth an immortal mendicant woman, by
name _Savari_, who had waited in attendance upon those departed ones.
Beholding thee, O Rāma,who art adored of all creatures like unto the
Deity Himself, that mendicant woman, ever engaged in pious observances,
shall attain to the abode of celestials. O Rāma, turning to the western
bank of Pāmpa, thou shalt, O Kākuthshtha, behold the incomparable and
secret asylum of Matanga. Fearing the divine authority of that great
ascetic Matanga, the elephants, though there are many, dare not cross
the threshold of his asylum. O Rāghava, this forest is widely known as
Matanga-wood. Thou shalt sport, O Rāma, with a delighted heart in that
forest resembling the celestial garden—_Nandana_ and filled with various
birds. There stands in front of Pampā the highly inaccessible mount
_Rishyamuka_, ornamented with many a blossoming tree and guarded on all
sides by little serpents. That mount is highly munificient. It was
created by Brahmā in the days of yore. A person, sleeping on the summit
of that hill and dreaming of an accession of wealth, really gets at it
after the dream is over. A perpetrator of iniquitous deeds and engaged
in impious observances ascending that hill, the Rākshasas seize upon
him, asleep, and bruise him. Thou shalt hear the terrible roar of the
young elephants ranging in the asylum of Matanga, situated on the banks
of Pampā. Thou shalt furthermore observe many a quickly moving,
infuriated elephant, resembling clouds in hue and with red temporal
juice oozing out of their heads, roaming here and there sometimes
separately and again in a band. Those mighty elephants, roaming the
forest, return to their woody homes, drinking the pleasant, pure and
sweet smelling water of Pampā. And do thou assuage thy grief, beholding
there the bears, wolves and _Rurus_ of a tender countenance like unto
sapphire, who are harmless and never afraid of human beings. There is a
huge cave, O Rāma, in that mountain, covered on all sides with rocks and
where it is very hard to enter. At the entrance of that cave lies a
beautiful, wide lake of cool water, hedged on all sides with trees
abounding in fruits. There liveth with other monkeys the virtuous-souled
_Sugriva_, who sometimes resideth on the summit of the hill." Having
thus addressed Rāma and Lakshmana, _Kavandha_, highly powerful
resembling the sun in effulgence and wearing garlands appeared beautiful
on the sky. Thereupon Rāma and Lakshmana, preparing to proceed spoke
unto that great one stationed in the sky, saying, "Do thou go." Whereto
_Kavandha_ replied, saying "Do ye proceed to make good your end" and
bidding them adieu, who were well pleased, departed. Regaining his
pristine beauty and shining in grace and effulgence that _Kavandha_, who
was on the sky, fixing his looks upon Rāma, and pointing out unto him
his way, said "Do thou make friends with (Sugriva)".

   ⁷⁶ A fruit-tree, the rose apple—_Lat. (Eugenia Jambolana)_.—T.

   ⁷⁷ A tree commonly _Piyal—Lat. (Buchanania latifolia)_.—T.

   ⁷⁸ The bread fruit or _Jaka_ tree—_Lat. (Artocarpus
      integrifolia)_.—T.

   ⁷⁹ The Indian fig-tree—_Lat. (Ficus Indica)_.—T.

   ⁸⁰ Waved leaf fig-tree—_Lat. (Ficus infectoria)_.—T.

   ⁸¹ A sort of ebony—_Lat. (Diospyros gtutinosa)_.—T.

   ⁸² A holy fig-tree—_Lat. (Ficus religiosa)_.—T.

   ⁸³ The name of a tree commonly _Kaniyar—Lat. (Pterospermum
      acerifolium)_.—T.

   ⁸⁴ The mango—_Lat. (Mangifera Indica)_.—T.

   ⁸⁵ A small tree—_Lat. (Mesua ferrea)_.—T.

   ⁸⁶ A kind of tree commonly _Tila_.—T.

   ⁸⁷ A tree—_Lat. (Galedupaarborea Rex)_.—T.

   ⁸⁸ Blue _Asoka—Lat. (Jonesia Asock)_.—T.

   ⁸⁹ A plant commonly _Kadamva—Lat. (Nauclea Kadamba)_.—T.

   ⁹⁰ A fragrant plant—_Lat. (Oleander or Nerium Odorum)_.—T.

   ⁹¹ The marking nut plant—_Lat. (Semecarpius anacardium)_.—T.

   ⁹² Red Sandal.—T.

   ⁹³ The coral tree—_Lat. (Erythrina fulgens)_.—T.

   ⁹⁴ The garden of the deity _Kuvera_. It is derived from
      _Chithraratha_—a _Gandharba_ in charge of the garden.

   ⁹⁵ The Rohi fish—_Lat. (cyprinus Rohita Ham)_.—T.

   ⁹⁶ A kind of fish resembling a wheel in appearance.—T.

   ⁹⁷ A kind of sprat, according to some, a shrimp or prawn.—T.




## SECTION LXXIV.


Thereupon Rāma and Lakshmana, sons of a kingly father, passing along the
way, pointed out by _Kavandha_, leading to the lake Pampā, proceeded
towards the West. They wending their way desirous of seeing Sugriva,
there came within the compass of their vision many trees, grown on the
summits of the mountains, blossoming with flowers and abounding in
fruits tasting sweet like unto honey. Passing the night on the summit of
a hill those two descendants of Rāghu arrived at the western bank of
Pampā and espied the pleasant asylum of _Savari_. Getting at that
charming hermitage covered on all sides with trees and casting their
looks around they beheld that female mendicant— _Savari_. No sooner had
that one of perfect asceticism beheld those highly intelligent Rāma and
Lakshmana than she rose up with folded hands and touching their feet
offered them duly water for washing their feet and mouth. Thereupon Rāma
spake unto that female ascetic, engaged in religious services, saying,
"O thou of sweet accents, hast thou got all hindrances to asceticism
removed? Is thy asceticism growing stronger every day? O thou having
asceticism for thy wealth, hast thou restricted thy anger and fare? Hast
thou observed the commandments and attained to mental felicity? Hast thy
attendance upon thy spiritual guide borne fruits?" Being thus accosted
by Rāma that old _Savari_, of accomplished asceticism and recognised by
the _Sidhas_, approaching Rāma spake:—"Favoured with thy presence my
asceticism hath attained to its consummation. Blessed is my birth,
fruitful is my service unto my spiritual guides and accomplished is my
asceticism. O best of men, thou art the foremost of celestials;
worshipping thee I attain to the abode of deities. O gentle one, slayer
of foes, thou that dost confer honors on men, thyself casting thy
auspicious looks upon me, consecrated I, by thy favour, shall attain to
the imperishable land of celestials. On thy setting foot on the mount
_Chitrakuta_, the ascetics whom I served, ascending celestial cars of
incomparable lustre, departed to heaven. Those great ascetics, cognizant
of virtue, said to me, "Rāma shall come to thy holy asylum. Do thou
receive with great reverence that guest together with Lakshmana. On
beholding him, thou shalt attain to that best land of the celestials
whence none returneth. O best of men, I was thus told, by those great
ascetics, and for thee I have collected various wild fruits growing on
the banks of Pampā." Being thus addressed by _Savari_, the
virtuous-souled Rāghava spake unto her conversant with the knowledge of
past and future, saying, "I have heard from Danu, in truth, about thy
divine authority as well as that of thy spiritual guides. If thou
purposest so I wish to witness it with my own eyes." Hearing these
accents dropping from Rāma’s lips, _Savari_ showing unto them the vast
forest said, "Do thou behold, O Rāghava, this forest, crowded with deer
and birds resembling a dense cloud. This forest is known as Matanga’s
wood. Here in this forest the pure-souled preceptors sacrificed unto
fire their persons consecrated by the _Mantras_ as Mantra itself. This
is that altar _Pratyaksthali_, ascending which my worshipful preceptors
used to offer flowers unto the deities with hands trembling with toil.
Behold, O best of Raghus, this altar of incomparable beauty, by virtue
of their asceticism, hath been still shedding its lustre on all the
sides. Behold, again, the seven seas have appeared here in conjunction,
at their very thought, worn out with fasts and therefore incapable of
moving on. Even those barks, which they used to place on these trees
after ablution have not yet been dried up. These flowers, of blue colour
which they offered unto the deities, being engaged in divine services,
have not yet been withered away. Thou hast observed this entire forest
and heard every thing worth hearing. I purpose now to renounce my body
being commanded by thee. I wish to approach those pure-souled ascetics,
whom I used to wait upon, and whom these asylums belong to. Hearing with
Lakshmana the speech of that pious one, Rāma gained an excess of joy and
exclaiming, "Wonderful it is!" again spake unto _Savari_ of keen
austerities,—"O gentle one, I have been worshipped by thee. Do thou
repair at thy ease and pleasure." Being thus addressed and ordered by
Rāma, _Savari_, wearing matted locks, rags and the skin of an antelope,
surrendered herself unto fire and rose high up in the welkin like onto
blazing fire. Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed with celestial
garlands, sprinkled with sandal-paste and wearing celestial cloth she
appeared of exquisite grace and lighted up the quarters like unto
lightning. By virtue of her devout meditation, _Savari_ repaired to that
holy region when dwelt her spiritual preceptors—the pure-hearted
ascetics.




## SECTION LXXV.


After Savari had repaired unto heaven by virtue of her divine prowess,
Rāma with his brother Lakshmana began to ponder over the pious influence
of those great ascetics. Thinking within himself about the divine
authority of those great ones, the virtuous-souled Rāma spake unto
Lakshmana, devoted and ever engaged in his well-being.—"Beheld have I, O
gentle one, the wondrous asylum of the pure-souled ascetics filled with
diverse birds and tigers rambling friendly with antelopes. O Lakshmana,
we have performed ablutions in the sacred waters of these seven seas and
offered oblations unto our manes. Our misfortunes have ended and
prosperity hath appeared and my mind is now filled with ecstacy of
delight. Me-thinks, best of men, auspiciousness shall soon appear unto
us; do thou come, therefore, we shall proceed towards the picturesque
lake Pampā. Yon appeareth in view, at no distance, the mount Rishyamuka.
Here dwells with four monkeys, the virtuous-souled Sugriva— Suryya’s
son, in constant fear of Vāli. I am in a hurry to behold Sugriva the
best of monkeys, for my business—Sitā’s quest—is entirely at his hands."
Unto the heroic Rāma, speaking thus, Saumitri said.—"Let us depart soon,
I am in haste too." Issuing out of Matanga’s asylum, the mighty Rāma,
lord of men, repaired with Lakshmana to the lake Pampā. Exercised with
grief, he arrived at the bank of that best of lakes, beholding (as he
passed along), vaious trees and pools, the mighty forest covered on all
sides with huge trees and flowers and resounding with the noise of
lapwings, peacocks, woodpeckers and various other birds and rattling of
the bamboos. Beholding, from distance, Pampā of sweet, cool and pure
water, Rāma performed ablution at the Matanga Sara (a portion of Pampā)
and paced slowly towards the lake. Thereupon Daçaratha’s son, stricken
with grief, bathed in Pampā, covered with lotuses. It was adorned on all
sides with _Tilakas_, _Asokas_, _Punagas_, _Uddalas_ and _Vakulas_. It
was a lake girt on all sides with pictueresque gardens, having its
waters undulating beautifully and transparent like unto crystal, and
covered all around with soft sands. It was filled with fish and
tortoise, adorned with trees on its banks, encircled with creepers
embracing her like companions and frequented by _Gandharbas_,
_Kinnaras_, serpents, _Yakshas_ and Rāshasas. It was covered with trees
and creepers of various kind, of cool water, and enveloped with beauty.
It was, somewhere, of red hue, in contact with water lillies, somewhere
white with _Kumudas_, somewhere blue with blue lotuses like unto a
blanket of diverse hues. It was filled with white and red lotuses and
encircled with blossoming mangoe groves and resounding with the music of
the peacocks. Beholding Pampā, ornamented like a damsel with _Tilakas_,
_Bijapuras_,⁹⁸ fig-trees, _Sukladrumas_,⁹⁹ flowery _Karavis_, blossoming
_Punnagas_, groves of _Malati_¹⁰⁰ and _Kunda_,¹⁰¹ _Vandhiras_,¹⁰²
_Nichulas_,¹⁰³ _Asokas_, _Saptaparuas_,¹⁰⁴ _Ketakas_,¹⁰⁵ _Atimuktas_,¹⁰⁶
and various others trees, Rāma the mighty son of Daçaratha began to
lament with Lakshmana. "There stands on its bank the mount Rishyamuka,
abounding in various metals and covered with trees of varieagated
flowers as mentioned before (by _Kavandha_). There dwelleth the famous
lord of monkeys, Sugrivā, the heroic son of the great Rikshyaraja. O
best of men, do thou approach the chief of monkeys." Rāma, having truth
for his prowess, again spake unto Lakshmana, saying, "O Lakshmana, how
shall I live without Sitā, who have been deprived of my kingdom, who am
poorly and have Sitā for my life?" Having said this unto Lakshmana, who
had nothing else in view, that best of Raghus, racked with sorrow and
grief and oppressed by Cupid, entered the lake Pampā graced with
lotuses. Proceeding slowly, observing the forest, Rāma beheld and
entered with Lakshmana Pampā, girt on all sides with beautiful woods and
filled with a multitude of diverse birds.

   ⁹⁸ Common citron—_Lat. (Citrus-medica)_.—T.

   ⁹⁹ _Lat. (Symplaces racemesa)_.—T.

  ¹⁰⁰ Great-flowered Jasmine—_Lat. (Jasminum Grandiflorum)_—T.

  ¹⁰¹ A kind of Jasmine:—_Lat. (J. Multifiorum)_.—T

  ¹⁰² _Lat. (Memisa Sirisha)_.—T.

  ¹⁰³ _Lat. (Barringtonia Acutangula)_.—T.

  ¹⁰⁴ _Lat. (Abstenia Scholaris)_.—T.

  ¹⁰⁵ _(Pandanus Odoratissumus)_.—T.

  ¹⁰⁶ _Lat. (Gaertnera Racemosa)_.—T.

END OF THE ARANYAKANDAM
        
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RĀMĀYANA, VOLUME 2. ĀRANYA ***