---
id: 502    
title: "PMI CAPM Course"
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
layout: single
permalink: /management/pmi-capm
date: 2020-08-03
categories:

tags: 
  - 'PMI CAMP Courses'

header:
  overlay_image: assets/images/post/ai-ml-resources.png
  overlay_filter: 0 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
  [//]: # caption: "Import Data Science Blogs"
  teaser: "/assets/images/ds-resources1.jpg"

author_profile: true
last_modified_at: 2020-08-03T15:46:43-04:00
mathjax: "true"
share: true
---

**PMI-CAPM**

## About Course

Certified Associate Project Manager (CAPM) is entry-level certification of PMI for aspiring Project Managers. Immediate after graduation or with very little project management experience if you are looking for a promising role in the project management space in any industry then this certificate is for you. Like PMP this exam is also based on A Guide of Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK). Unlike the PMP CAPM exam is not experienced-based therefore most of the questions are straightforward questions from PMBoK. Every chapter of PMBoK has a predefined percentage of questions allocated for the CAPM exam.

## Chapter-wise % of questions for CAPM exam (source www.pmi.org)

*   Introduction 4%
*   Project Life Cycle & Organization 4%
*   Project Management Processes for a Project 11%
*   Integration 11%
*   Scope 11%
*   Time 11%
*   Cost 9%
*   Quality 7%
*   Communication 7%
*   HR 7%
*   Risk 11%
*   Procurement 7%

## Who should attend?
  
Anybody who is looking to kick starts his/her career in projects as project assistant or coordinator and who has a secondary diploma can go for this certification.

## Course Outline

### Day 1

PART-1

*   Participants expectation setting, understanding their role and challenges
*   Introduction to PMI, PMI Standards and Project Management
*   PMP Certification Process
*   Baseline Exam

PART-2

*   Introduction to Knowledge Areas, Process Groups and PMBoK Processes
*   Project Management Framework
*   Project Integration Management

PART-3 : Project Scope Management

*   Plan Scope Management
*   Collect Requirement
*   Define scope
*   Create WBS
*   Validate Scope
*   Control Scope

### Day 2

PART-4 : Project Time Management

*   Plan Schedule Management
*   Define Activities
*   Sequence Activities
*   Estimate Activity Resources
*   Estimate Activity Durations
*   Develop Schedule
*   Control Schedule

PART-5 : Project Cost Management

*   Plan Cost Management
*   Estimate Cost
*   Determine Budget
*   Control Cost

PART-6 : Project Quality Management

*   Plan Quality
*   Perform Quality Assurance
*   Perform Quality Control

### Day 3

PART-7 : Project Human Resource Management

*   Develop Human Resource Plan
*   Acquire Project Team
*   Develop Project Team
*   Manage Project team

PART-8 : Project Communication Management

*   Plan Communications
*   Manage Communications
*   Control Communications

PART-9 : Project Risk Management

*   Plan Risk Management
*   Identify Risk
*   Perform Qualitative Risk Analysis
*   Perform Quantitative Risk Analysis
*   Plan Risk Response
*   Report Performance

PART-10 :Project Procurement Management

*   Plan Procurement Management
*   Conduct Procurement
*   Control Procurement
*   Close Procurement

PART-11: Project Stakeholder Management

*   Identify Stakeholder
*   Plan Stakeholder Management
*   Manage Stakeholder Engagement
*   Control Stakeholder Engagement

## Delivery Mode

**Classroom Based Training**: This is for a corporate batch of 10+ participants at one physical location. Based on the need of your company you can request for this training. This training can be conducted on your premises or in a nearby facility which is near to most of the participants.

**Live Virtual Class (LVC)**: This is for individuals who are spread across different physical locations. In this training, we have live classes, discussions, and QA.

## Prerequisites

Prerequisite for writing CAPM exam is

A secondary degree (high school diploma, associate’s degree or the global equivalent)

  
1,500 hours of project experience  
OR  
23 hours of project management education completed by the time of the exam

## Course Takeaways

*   23 PDU Certificate, which can be used to submit your CAPM application.
*   Understand complete project management framework
*   Learn 10 Knowledge Areas of a Project from PMBOK
*   Learn 5 Process groups of a Project from PMBOK
*   Learn 49 Processes of a Project from PMBOK
*   Learn 150+ Tools & Techniques of a Project from PMBOK (grouped in 65 TT)
*   Learn about Organizational Process Assets & Enterprise Environmental Factors
*   Learn to manage a project from start to end
*   Tips to prepare for CAPM Exam
*   A printed copy of training slides
*   Books for Exam Preparation (optional)
*   Process Charts & Other Exam Preparation Tools (optional)

## Course Duration

The above course plan is 3 days. But you need to prepare approx 2 months before you write this exam. Post-training preparation duration can be less for you if you already have some experience in project management.

## Delivery Method

Depending upon delivery mode different tools and methods are explored to engage the participants and ensure that you are really learning concepts.

*   Concept Explanation with the example of day to day life
*   Module end quizzes
*   Role Plays
*   Case Study
*   Group Exercises
*   Q&A Sessions
*   Quizzes

## Exam Format

*   150 _multiple_\-choice questions. Of the 150 questions, 15 are considered pretest questions (it means you will not get any marks even if you answer them correctly or will not lose any mark if you answer them wrong, but you do not a question on screen is pretest or not).
*   You get 3 hours for this exiam
*   All questions carry equal marks.
*   No Negative marking

## FAQ


** How long CAPM® Certification is Valid? **

This certification of PMI is valid for 5 years and it expires automatically at the end of 5 years. After this either you apply for PMP certification or you rewrite the CAPM exam depending on your need.

** How many PMP® Exam attempt can be given in period of one year? **

In one year, a candidate can attempt maximum 3 times. But you have to pay for every re-attempt.

** Is PMI® Membership mandatory to book CAPM® Exam? **

PMI® membership is not mandatory but this comes with no extra cost for the first year. As PMI membership fee is US$139 (for the first year), and CAPM® exam fee for member USD 225, non-member USD 300. You also need to factor in the cost of PMBOK. For members it is free and non-members can purchase this for USD 99.

** Can I print hardcopy of PMBOK® handbook for my reading convenience? **

Yes. When you become a member you get access to your PMBOK copy. You may print your copy of the PMBOK® handbook but you are not allowed to distribute it as per the PMI® license agreement. Obviously, you are not allowed to share your softcopy with anybody.

** Do I get opportunity to contact trainer for any quick queries**

Yes, you can drop email or call trainer based on the mutual availability.